Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect

 Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   186  ( 2015 )  388 – 394 

5th World Conference on Learning, Teaching and Educational Leadership, WCLTA 2014  
Educational Innovation in the Computer Architecture area 
Jose Manuel Lopez-Guede a*, Ismael Sotob, Aitor Moreno Fdez. de Lecetac,  
Jesus Maria Larrañagad 

 
 

 

a Systems Engineering and Automatic Control Dept, University College of Engineering of Vitoria, Basque Country University (UPV/EHU), 
C/Nieves Cano 12, 01006 Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain 
b Electric Enginering Dept.,  Santiago de Chile University, Av. Ecuador 3519, 9170124 Santiago, Chile  
c Ibermática, Leonardo Da Vinci 9, 01510 Miñano , Spain 
d Business Management Dept., University College of Engineering of Vitoria, Basque Country University (UPV/EHU ), C/Nieves Cano 12, 01006 
Vitoria, Spain 
 
 

 
Abstract 
 
In  the  present work  authors  give  a  detailed  description  of  the  previously  performed  analysis  carried  out  to  formulate  a  concr ete 
educational  innovation  project  proposal  in  the  area  of  the  Computer  Architecture,  more  specifically,  in  the  Computer  Structur e 
and Architecture  sub-module. That  project was  submitted  to  the  competitive Educational  Innovation Projects Call  2013 -2015 of 
the  Basque  Country  University  (UPV/EHU,  Spain),  and  fortunately,  it  was  elected  and  granted  by  the  Education  Advisory 
Service of  the same university. This project follows  the  the way started by another similar project but  in other knowledge area of 
Electronics  in  the  same University College.  In  this paper,  the  specific problems of  the Computer Structure and Architecture  s ub-
module  in  the University College of Vitoria-Gasteiz  (that  is  the place where  it  is being  carried out) are analyzed,  the  framework 
in  a  wide  sense  is  described  (University,  University  College  and  syllabus)  and  the  specificities  of  the  current  project  are 
explained.  All  the  analysis  is  done  taking  into  account  the  competences  point  of  view  (both  specific  for  each  subject  and 
transversal for the degree). 
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of Academic World Education and Research Center. 
Peer-review under responsibility of Academic World Education and Research Center
Keywords: Active Learning, Cooperative Learning, Computer Engineering, Computer Architecture; 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 

Active  Learning  is  a  wide  paradigm  that  groups  several  methods,  and  it  is  based  on  the  responsibility  and 
involvement  of  the  students  in  its  own  learning  process  (Bonwell  &  Eison,  1991;  Felder  &  Brent,  1994).  One  of 
 

* Jose Manuel Lopez-Guede. Tel.: +34-945-014-084 
   E-mail address: jm.lopez@ehu.es 

1877-0428 © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of Academic World Education and Research Center
doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.04.094 

 Jose Manuel Lopez-Guede et al.  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   186  ( 2015 )  388 – 394 

389

these  methods  is  named  Cooperative  Learning,  that  is  a  paradigm  in  which  the  learning  activities  are  planned 
looking  for  the  positive  interdependence  between  the  participants  of  such  learning  (Felder & Brent,  2001; Felder & 
Brent, 2009) . 
In  this  paper  authors  describe  an  Educational  Innovative  Project  based  on  both  active  and  cooperative  learning, 
which  is being carried out  in  the  field of Computer Architecture.  Its  implementation  is being carried out  in  the  sub -
module  named  Computer  Structure  and  Architecture  of  the  Bachelor  Degree  in  Computer  Management  and 
Information  Systems  Engineering,  of  the  University  College  of  Engineering  of  Vitoria -Gasteiz,  University  of  the 
Basque  Country  (UPV/EHU,  Spain).  With  this  implementation  we  are  trying  to  overcome  several  difficulties  that 
have been detected in the subjects of that sub-module. 
The  structure  of  the  paper  is  as  follows.  The  second  section  describes  the  specific  problems  of  the  Computer 
Structure  and  Architecture  sub-module.  The  third  section  analyzes  the  framework  in  which  the  project  is  being 
carried  out,  analyzing  the  support  given  by  the  University  of  the  Basque  Country,  the  University  College  and  the 
syllabus. The detailed characteristics of  the project,  its background and  the expected  results are shown  in  the  fourth 
section. Finally, our conclusions and future work are described in the fifth and last section.  
 
2.  Specific problems of the Computer Structure and Architecture sub -module 
 

In  this  section we are going  to describe  the  specific problems  that were  found  inside  the Computer Structure and  
Architecture  sub-module.  As  it  will  be  explained  deeply  in  section  3,  this  sub -module  belongs  to  module  “M02  – 
Module common to the Informatics branch”, and it is composed of “Computer Structure” (first course, 6 ECTS) and 
“Computer  Architecture”  (second  course,  6  ECTS)  subjects.  Without  going  into  technical  details,  we  can  say 
without fear of deception that it is par excellence the sub-module dedicated to the hardware area of the degree. 
Apart from other minor circumstances, we can classify the following ones as problematic: 
(cid:120)  The  students  of  Degree  in  Computer  Management  and  Information  Systems  Engineering  are  students  that 
basically  seek  software  knowledge,  not  hardware,  so  their  predisposition  towards  these  subjects  is  not  exactly 
optimal. 
 
(cid:120)  Derived  from  this  idea,  they  tend  to  have  a  confused  view  of  the  subjects  that makes  them  believe  that  they  are 
useless, at least immediately. 
 
(cid:120)  When they start the engineering studies, students have some knowledge of mathematics, physics, chemistry, etc.; 
however,  when  they  start  this  degree  they  do  not  have  any  hardware  knowledge,  so  they  have  to  start  from 
absolute zero. 
 
(cid:120)  The  first  subject  of  the  sub-module  is  in  the  first  course,  when  students  do  not  have  yet  a  habit  of  working 
according to what engineering is. 
 
(cid:120)  On the other hand, the second subject belongs to the second course, still far from finishing their studies without a 
clear job position horizon, so they cannot see its utility.  
 
(cid:120)  The courses are in sequence, and it is seemingly positive, but the reality is that  in the  first course there are a tiny 
number of students who go to the second course passing all subjects, so between the two subjects is usually more 
than one calendar year. 
 
All  these  circumstances  make  it  appropriate  to  provide  a  more  dynamic  and  creati ve  subjects  that  compose  the 
sub-module,  with  the  aim  of maximizing  the  classroom  attendance,  the  involvement  in  them  and  the  acquisition  of 
competences (both specific and transversal) established for the two subjects.  
 
 
 

 

390  

 Jose Manuel Lopez-Guede et al.  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   186  ( 2015 )  388 – 394 

3.  Global context 
 

In order  to solve  the problems described above, we have  launched an educational  innovation project  in a context 
and  under  some  specific  conditions.  This  framework  will  be  explained  in  this  section,  specifying  in  different 
subsections  aspects  of  the  University  as  institution,  the  University  College  and  the  syllabus  where  it  is  being 
implemented. 
 
3.1.  Institutional framework: the University of the Basque Country  
 
The  project  is  being  carried  out  at  the  University  of  the  Basque  Country,  (UPV/EHU,  Spain),  financially 
supported  by  a  grant  obtained  in  the  competitive  Educational  Innovation  Project  call  2013 -2015  of  the  Education 
Advisory  Service,  Vicerectorship  for  Teaching  Quality  and  Innovation.  This  vicerectorship  is  structured  in  four 
main areas: 
 
(cid:120)  Quality Cathedra: Contributes to  the knowledge, implementation and improvement of quality management in all 
areas of the organization of the university, helping to achieve the highest standards of excellence.  
 
Institutional  Evaluation  Service:  A  service  of  the  university  which  aims  to  guide  and  promote  the  process  of 
evaluation, verification and accreditation as well as those related to improving the quality of higher education. It 
also works with reference quality agencies in developing their programs in the university.  
 
(cid:120)  Faculty  Evaluation  Service:  A  service  dedicated  to  promote,  design,  develop,  advise,  facilitate  and  train  faculty 
evaluation process with the desire to contribute to the improvement of teaching quality.  
 
(cid:120)  Educational  Advisory  Service:  It  is  a  service  which manages  courses  and  training  according  to  the  needs  of  the 
faculty. It puts in place processes to gather information about which are the formation necessities.  

(cid:120) 

 

All  these  areas  converge  towards  a  methodology  named  IKD -Ikasketa  Kooperatibo  eta  Dinamikoa  in  Basque 
(Dynamic and Cooperative Teaching-Learning in English), characterized by the following principles:  
 
(cid:120)  Active  Education:  IKD  invites  students  to  become  the  architects  of  their  own  learning  and  an  active  element  in 
the  governance  of  the  university.  To  get  this,  it  encourages  learning  through  active  methodologies,  ensures 
continuous  and  formative  evaluation,  articulates  the  acknowledgement  of  its  previous  experience  (academic, 
professional, vital and cultural), and promotes mobility programs (Erasmus,  SENECA) and cooperation. 
 
(cid:120)  Territorial and social development: The IKD model development requires an ongoing process through which the 
university  is committed  to  its social environment and community, with public vocation and economic and social 
sustainability  criteria,  promoting  values  of  equality  and  inclusion.  It  also  takes  into  consideration  peculiar 
characteristics of each of the three provinces where sits the university, to contribute to their empowerment and to 
extract  from  them  their  formative  potential. A  curricula  development  responsible with  the  social  environment  is 
done  through  internships,  collaboration  with  social  initiatives,  social  networks,  the  relationship  with  companies 
and mobility programs that promote international experience and cooper ation of our students. 
 
Institutional  Development:  IKD  curricula  development  drives  institutional  policies  that  promote  cooperation 
between  the agents  involved  in  teaching,  in an environment of confidence and dynamism.  It promotes programs 
that  encourage  institutional  structuring  through  the  figures  of  the  course  or  module  coordinator,  quality 
commissions  and  promoting  teaching  teams,  which  are  key  elements  in  this  new  teaching  culture.  Other 
institutional  actions  such  as  offering  different  types  of  education  (part-time  attendance,  semi-face,  non-face), 
significant  and  sustainable  use  of  information  and  communication  technologies  (ICTs),  institutional  regulations 
concerning  assessment,  infrastructure  design  of  educational  institutions  and  public  spaces  (IKDguneak-
IKDplaces), the extension of hours of use of space, should be considered from a perspective that encourages IKD 
culture. 

(cid:120) 

 Jose Manuel Lopez-Guede et al.  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   186  ( 2015 )  388 – 394 

391

 
(cid:120)  Professional development: First, the continuous training of the people involved in teaching activities (faculty and 
support staff to teaching), in order to promote adequate professional development. Training programs (ERAGIN, 
BEHATU,  FOPU)  project  to  support  educational  innovation  (PIE)  and  assessment  tools  for  teaching 
(DOCENTIAZ), among others, are actions that support the construction of IKD.  
 
3.2.  College framework: the University College of Engineering of Vitoria-Gasteiz 
 
This  experience  is  being  developed  in  the  University  College  of  Engineering  of  Vitoria -Gasteiz  (University  of 
Basque Country, Spain). This University College  has  a  long  teaching  career of over 50 years of  existence,  so  it has 
known  various  curricula.  The  University  College  has  a  wide  range  of  studies,  and  currently  it  has  finished  the 
Master  degree  in  Industrial  Engineering  Organization  and  the  following  bachelor  de grees:  Technical  Industrial 
Engineering,  specialization  in  Industrial  Electronics; Technical  Industrial  Engineering,  specialization  in  Electricity; 
Technical  Industrial  Engineering,  specialization  in  Mechanics;  Technical  Industrial  Engineering,  specializat ion  in 
Industrial Chemistry; Technical Engineering in Topography and Technical Engineering in Computer Management.  
At  this  time,  after  the  adaptation  to  the  European  Higher  Education  Area  (EHEA)  the  University  College  offers 
the  Master  in  Production  Organization  and  Industrial  Management  and  the  following  bachelor  degrees:  Degree  in 
Electrical  Engineering,  Degree  in  Industrial  Electronics  and  Automatics;  Degree  in  Geomatics  and  Topography, 
Degree  in  Mechanical  Engineering,  Degree  in  Chemical  Engineering  and   Degree  in  Computer  Science  and 
Information Systems. It is in this last degree where our work is being framed.  
 
3.3.  Syllabus 
 
The  syllabus  of  the  Degree  in  Computer  Science  and  Information  Systems  from  the  University  College  of 
Engineering of Vitoria-Gasteiz is structured around five modules: 
 
(cid:120)  M01 - Basic training module: The syllabus contains 60 ECTS of basic training materials related to the branch of 
Engineering  and  Architecture,  which  are  divided  into  four  sub -modules  (Mathematics,  Physics, Computing  and 
Business). The aim is to ensure the achievement of basic competences.  

 
(cid:120)  M02  -  Common  module  to  the  Computing  branch:  They  are  subjects  that  cover  skills  that  are  nuclear  and  are 
covered  by  subjects  which  do  not  form  part  of  the  core  cited  above,  but  provide  knowledge  and  general 
competences in the field of Computer Engineering, providing students a versatile and multi -disciplinary training. 
There  are  66  ECTS  for  11  subjects  taught  between  first  and  third  year,  organized  into  six  sub-modules.  This 
module aims to ensure the achievement of the common competences to the computer branch.  

 
(cid:120)  M03  -  Information  Systems  module:  The  subjects  comprising  the  module  Information  Systems  (54  ECTS) 
provide training that, based on the competences acquired in basic and common modules to  the computer training 
branch,  explores  aspects  related  to  the  organization, management  and  information  systems. The  nine  subjects  of 
the module are grouped into three sub -modules between 12 and 24 credits. 

 
(cid:120)  M04 - Final Project module: The Final Project has 12 ECTS, and is required  for graduation. The Final Project is 
an original work to be done individually. The project must be presented and defended with a university tribunal, 
and  consists  of  a  job  in  the  field  of  Information  Systems  (specific  Computer  Engineering  technology).  In  the 
development  and  presentation  of  the  Final  Project  the  skills  acquired  during  the  whole  of  the  teachings  are 
synthesized and integrated. 

 
(cid:120)  M05  -  Optional  Module  Training:  Students  have  to  study  240  credits.  On  one  hand,  180  credits  correspond  to 
compulsory  knowledge  (Basic  training  module,  Common  module  to  the  Computing  branch  and  Information 
Systems module),  and  12  credits  to  the Final Project module. The  remaining  4 8  credits  are  the  result  of  the  free 
choice of  the  students. When  choosing  these 48 ECTS  there are several options:  training  in companies  (up  to 24 

392  

 Jose Manuel Lopez-Guede et al.  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   186  ( 2015 )  388 – 394 

ECTS);  the  development  of  cultural,  sporting,  charity  or university  activities  (up  to  6 ECTS);  or  take  cours es  in 
the offer of optional titration.  

 
4.  Project design 
 

This  section  will  describe  the  specific  design  of  the  educational  innovation  project,  analyzing  in  different 
subsections  the  previous  experiences  in  similar  projects,  the  specificities  of  this  project   and  finally,  the  expected 
results. 
 
4.1.  Previous project experiences 
 
In  the  working  group  created  to  carry  out  the  project  which  is  being  described  in  this  paper,  there  are  faculties 
who have participated in a similar project. For example, one of the authors  of this paper was the main investigator of 
the  project  named  "Intra  and  Intergroup  Cooperative  Learning  in  Industrial  Informatics  Area".  That  project  was 
selected  to  be  executed  in  the  biennium  2011-2013  in  a  competitive  call  of  the  Education  Advisory  Service  of  the 
University  of  the  Basque  Country  (UPV/EHU).  Besides  the  good  results  obtained  from  the  academic  and  teaching 
point of view, the involvement of students came to the point that it could generate even  two journal articles  (Lopez-
Guede,  Fernandez-Gauna,  Graña,  Oterino  &  Larrañaga,  2012;  Lopez-Guede,    Fernandez-Gauna,  Graña  &  Oterino, 
2013) . 
 
4.2.  Specificities of the project 
 
As  noted  above,  in  2013  the  Education  Advisory  Service  of  the  Vicerectorship   for  Teaching  Quality  and 
Innovation  published  a  competitive  call  asking  for  proposals  related  to  active  learning.  Following  the  criterion  of 
several faculties, this was a very interesting call for several reasons:  
 
It  gave  us  the  chance  to  experiment  in  the  field  of  active  learning  with  support  of  the  university.  This  is  a  very 
important  circumstance  because  if  the  results  are  not  as  good  as  is  desirable,  the  participating  faculties  will  not 
be exposed to actions by the institution at the end of the projec t.  
 
It  gave  us  the  opportunity  to  experience  between  faculties  from  different  areas  of  knowledge,  which  we  never 
could have interacted in any other case.  
 
(cid:120)  We  faced  the possibility of achieving  institutional  recognition. This  is an  important  factor because   to participate 
in such kind of projects allows being included in other educational activities of the institution.  
 
It  gave  us  the  chance  to  enjoy  a  few  hours  of  class  exemption  to  prepare  the  project  and  design  the  set  of 
activities that led to active learning. 
 
It gave us the opportunity to enjoy an endowment to renew  the teaching materials and to disseminate the project 
itself in academic settings. 
 
The  authors  of  this  paper,  along  with  other  teachers  submitted  a  project  proposal  entitled  "Intra  and  Inte rgroup 
Cooperative  Learning  in  the  Computer  Structure    and  Architecture  Sub -module",  which  was  accepted  to  be 
developed in the biennium 2013-2015, a proposal that we explain below.  
This  proposal  is  developed  over  a  biennium,  which  covers  the  two  subjects  sub-module,  so  its  temporal 
development  is  from  the  second  semester  (beginning  of  the  course  of Computer Structure)  of  the  course  2013/2014 
through  December  2015  (administrative  finalization  of  the  project).  In  short,  this  is  a  cyclical  approach  that  is 
exercised  twice  for  each  subject,  being  the  goal  promotion  (or  to  which  more  study  will  focus)  that  has  taken  the 
course  of Computer Structure  during  2014-2015  and Computer Architecture  during  2015/2016. From  that  point  on, 
all future promotions will use this methodology in the sub-module of Computer Structure and Architecture. 

(cid:120) 

(cid:120) 

(cid:120) 

(cid:120) 

 Jose Manuel Lopez-Guede et al.  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   186  ( 2015 )  388 – 394 

393

The basic operating mechanism is the working group, because as shown in the title of the project it is the support 
for  cooperative  learning,  both  within  each  working  group  and  among  dif ferent  workgroups.  The  basic  sequence  of 
activities that are being carried out can be detailed as follows:  
 
1.  The  first year of  implementation,  the educational  innovation specialist of  the  team will advise  the  remaining 
faculties  for  each  subject  on  the  specific  techniques  to  use,  group  size  and  variety  of  activities  to  prefer  in 
terms of size. The range is dictated by the specific competencies to achieve, as well as some transversal ones. 
He will also advise on techniques to evaluate the performance of what has been launched. 
 
2.  Faculties  directly  related  to  the  technical  content  of  the  subjects  pose  a  series  of  learning  activities  looking 
for achieving specific and transversal competences.  

3.  At  the  beginning  of  each  subject,  the  faculty  of  the  Department  of  Bus iness  Organization  member  of  the 
team  will  provide  the  students  with  basic  techniques  for  maximum  utilization  of  resources.  He  also  will 
emphasize the techniques for conflict resolution.  

4.  Each  subject  will  be  developed  according  to  the  principles  of  cooperative  learning,  with  the  formation  of 
groups  and  the  production  of  deliverables  by  them.  These  deliverables  will  be  written  works  with  their 
corresponding oral presentations.  

5.  After  the  implementation  in  each  subject,  it  will  be  subject  to  an  externa l  evaluation,  understood  as  that 
carried out by another team member from another school, thereby obtaining valuable feedback.  

6.  Finally,  note  that  throughout  the  whole  process  we  will  have  the  collaboration  of  two  very  young 
researchers, who will monitor the whole process.  

 
Thus, apart from the specific competencies to each of the subjects, they are working the following generic skills:  
 
(cid:120)  Written communication: to be worked by means of written works that will be assessed by teachers.  
 
(cid:120)  Oral communication: it will be worked by means of presentations in class.  
 
(cid:120)  Teamwork: to be worked along the subjects because they will be the basic mode of operation . 
 
(cid:120)  Capacity  for  innovation  and  creativity:  to  be  constantly  worked  at  the  time  of  designing  both  theoretical  and 
practical works. 
 
(cid:120)  Self study: it will also be worked steadily, at the same time that the previous two transversal competences.  
 
4.3.  Expected results 
  

This subsection will describe the results that we expect to achieve based on our previous experiences, because  the 
described project is still an ongoing work.  
 
Increased  attendance  at  classes:  With  the  implementation  of  such  projects,  the  faculty  has  noted  on  previous 
experiences  an  increase  in  student  attendance  at  classes.  This  usually  comes  motivated  because  the  classes  are 
not  perceived  as  expositive  ones,  but  they  can  interact  because  necessarily  coincide  with  other  students  of  the 
subject. 
 
Increased involvement and participation: Faculties often perceived an increased involvement and participation of 
students  in  the  development  of  classes.  Prior  to  implementation  they  used  to  show  passive  roles,  but  using  the 

 

 

 

 

(cid:120) 

(cid:120) 

394  

 Jose Manuel Lopez-Guede et al.  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   186  ( 2015 )  388 – 394 

paradigm  of  active  learning,  faculty  goes  to  the  background  and  students  use  time  and  space  in  an  efficient 
manner. 
 
(cid:120)  Better monitoring,  tracking  and  evo lution  of  each  student:  It  has  been  shown  that  the  use  of  collaborative  tasks 
with deliverables by each working group can include in the  schedule a number of evaluation points that evaluate 
the  learning  achieved,  serving  as  breakpoints  if  a  poor  trend  is  detected.  This  implies  corrective  actions  if 
necessary, including by the student.  
 
(cid:120)  Better results in final tests: In the case of final tests, best results are expected due to ongoing work on the subject. 
Moreover,  in  other  cases  these  final  exams  are  not  to   be  such  a  stressful  experience  because  they  have  followed 
their own learning process.  

 
5.  Conclusions 
 

In this paper we have presented an educational innovation project in the Computer Architecture area, or rather, in 
the  sub-module  of  Computer  Structure  and  Architecture,  using  the  terminology  of  the  syllabus  of  the  Degree  in 
Computer Management  and  Information  Systems  Engineering  of  the University  College  of  Engineering  of Vitoria -
Gasteiz, where  it  is being carrying out. First we explained  the specific problem of  the sub-module, emphasizing  the 
subjects  that  compose  it.  Next,  we  analyzed  the  framework  (university,  University  College  and  syllabus)  and  the 
constraints derived  for  the adoption of a solution. Later we presented  the educational  innovation project  as a  tool  to 
solve  the  situation, analyzing  previous experiences and  results  to be achieved. As  future work,  it  is obvious  that  the 
next  step  is  to  complete  the  implementation  that  is  still  being  carried  out,  verifying  the  improvements  that  we  are 
trying to achieve. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 

This  research  project  on  educational  innovation  is  being  financially  supported  by  the  grant  6719  of  the 
competitive call  for educational  innovation projects 2013 -2015 of  the Educational Advisory Service, Vicerectorship  
for  Teaching  Quality  and  Innovation,  University  of  the  Basque  Country  (UPV/EHU),  support  that  is  greatly 
acknowledged.  Authors  also  wish  to  thank  the  cooperative  work  done  by  students  who  kindly  participated  in  the 
project  (referred  to  above  as  previous  experience)  with  the  grant  6397  of  the  competitive  Call  for  innovative 
educational  projects  at  the  same  university  in  the  2011-2013  biennium  (which  was  also  supervised  by  the  authors), 
as  previous  experience  using  cooperative  learning  techniques,  since  good   results  have  served  as  a  precursor  and 
inspiration project whose design has been reported and is being implemented.   
 
References 
 
Bonwell,  C.  &  Eison,  J.  (1991).  Active  Learning:  Creating  Excitement  in  the  Classroom.  AEHE-ERIC  Higher  Education  Report  No.  1. 
Washington, D.C.: Jossey-Bass.  
Felder, R.M. & Brent, R.  (1994).  Cooperative  Learning  in  Technical Courses:  Procedures,  Pitfalls,  and  Payoffs.   ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service 
Felder, R.M. & Brent, R. (2001). Effective Strategies for Cooperative Learning. J. Cooperation & Collaboration  in College Teaching, 10 (2), 69-
75  
Felder, R.M. & Brent, R. (2009). Active Learning: An Introduction. ASQ Higher Education Brief, 2(4) 
Lopez-Guede, J. M., Fernandez-Gauna, B., Graña, M. & Oterino, F.  (2013). On the influence of the prediction horizon in dynamic matrix control. 
International Journal of Control Science and Engineering, 3 (1), 22-30. 
Lopez-Guede,  J. M., Fernandez-Gauna, B., Graña, M., Oterino, F. & Larrañaga  J. M.  (2012).  Effect of  the  lambda parameter  in dynamix matrix 
controllers performance. Journal of Computer and Information Technology, 2(2), 81-88. 

 

 

