Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Microprocessors and Microsystems

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / m i c p r o

An infrastructure for accurate characterization of single-event transients
in digital circuits
Varadan Savulimedu Veeravalli a,⇑
, Thomas Polzer a, Ulrich Schmid a, Andreas Steininger a,
Michael Hofbauer b, Kurt Schweiger b, Horst Dietrich b, Kerstin Schneider-Hornstein b,
Horst Zimmermann b, Kay-Obbe Voss c, Bruno Merk c, Michael Hajek d,1
a Institute of Computer Engineering, Vienna University of Technology, Treitlstrasse 1-3, A-1040 Vienna, Austria
b Institute of Electrodynamics, Microwave and Circuit Engineering, Vienna University of Technology,Gusshausstrasse 25/354, A-1040 Vienna, Austria
c Materials Research Group, Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research (GSI), Planckstrasse 1, D-64291 Darmstadt, Germany
d Institute of Atomic and Subatomic Physics, Vienna University of Technology, Stadionallee 2, A-1020 Vienna, Austria

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Available online 11 May 2013

Keywords:
Asynchronous digital design
Radiation fault-tolerance
Single-event transients
Single-event upsets
LFSR counters
Elastic pipelines
Muller C-elements
TCAD models
Spice models
SET injection experiments
Ion beam radiation

We present the architecture and a detailed pre-fabrication analysis of a digital measurement ASIC facil-
itating long-term irradiation experiments of basic asynchronous circuits, which also demonstrates the
suitability of the general approach for obtaining accurate radiation failure models developed in our FATAL
project. Our ASIC design combines radiation targets like Muller C-elements and elastic pipelines as well
as standard combinational gates and ﬂip-ﬂops with an elaborate on-chip measurement infrastructure.
Major architectural challenges result from the fact that the latter must operate reliably under the same
radiation conditions the target circuits are exposed to, without wasting precious die area for a rad-hard
design. A measurement architecture based on multiple non-rad-hard counters is used, which we show to
be resilient against double faults, as well as many triple and even higher-multiplicity faults. The design
evaluation is done by means of comprehensive fault injection experiments, which are based on detailed
Spice models of the target circuits in conjunction with a standard double-exponential current injection
model for single-event transients (SET). To be as accurate as possible, the parameters of this current
model have been aligned with results obtained from 3D device simulation models, which have in turn
been validated and calibrated using micro-beam radiation experiments at the GSI in Darmstadt, Ger-
many. For the latter, target circuits instrumented with high-speed sense ampliﬁers have been used for
analog SET recording. Together with a probabilistic analysis of the sustainable particle ﬂow rates, based
on a detailed area analysis and experimental cross-section data, we can conclude that the proposed archi-
tecture will indeed sustain signiﬁcant target hit rates, without exceeding the resilience bound of the mea-
surement infrastructure.

Ó 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

Open access under CC BY  license.

1. Introduction

TU Vienna’s FATAL project (Fault-tolerant Asynchronous Logic)2
is devoted to the foundations of a framework for modeling and anal-
ysis of fault-tolerant asynchronous digital circuits, using fault-toler-
ant distributed algorithms knowledge. Besides handling circuit/

⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +43 1 58801 18203.
E-mail address: varadan@ecs.tuwien.ac.at (V. Savulimedu Veeravalli).
1 Present address: Radiation Safety and Monitoring Section, International Atomic
Energy Agency, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria.
2 This work is supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) under project
numbers P21694 and P20529. For more information consult http://ti.tuwien.ac.at/
ecs/research/projects/fatal/.

environment speciﬁcations, composition and decomposition and
hierarchical proofs [1–3], it also addresses adequate failure and
metastability models for digital circuits. Overall, FATAL’s aim is to
contribute to a ‘‘Theory of Dependable VLSI’’, which has been identi-
ﬁed as a major challenge in [4].
Unlike most research in this area, FATAL is primarily (albeit not
exclusively) focusing on asynchronous circuits. This is backed-up
by the fact that, ultimately, the operation of any combinational
digital logic gate is inherently asynchronous. Moreover, asyn-
chrony is also a quite natural phenomenon at higher system layers,
as in Globally Asynchronous, Locally Synchronous (GALS) architec-
tures [5], for example. Unfortunately, unlike for synchronous sys-
tems, fault-tolerance is difﬁcult to guarantee in asynchronous
systems [6], and has hence not received much attention in asyn-
chronous digital circuits [7–10,1,11].

0141-9331 Ó 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.micpro.2013.04.011

Open access under CC BY  license.

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

773

In order to systematically reason about fault-tolerant VLSI cir-
cuits, suitable failure models are mandatory. For ‘‘classic’’ sources
of errors, like aging and electric wear-out [12], there is a huge body
of work to rely upon. For radiation-induced errors, however, which
are increasingly dominating the failure rate of deep submicron
VLSI circuits [13,14], this is not the case. Radiation-induced errors,
collectively termed single-event effects (SEEs) in literature, occur
when the active area of a VLSI circuit is hit by ionizing particles
(or even by neutrons, which typically result from heavy ion inter-
actions with nitrogen or oxygen atoms in the atmosphere).
As opposed to permanent SEEs such as latch-up, threshold volt-
age shifts and even destructive burn-outs in power semiconductors
[15–17], the primary concern in modern VLSI circuits are transient
SEEs: An ionizing particle hitting a reverse-biased junction of a
transistor deposits charge along its track, which in turn can cause
a single-event transient (SET) pulse (0.1–1 ns range) at the output. If
the affected transistor is part of a storage element (e.g., an SRAM
cell or a latch), this may cause the element to ﬂip its state, leading
to a single-event upset (SEU). Unfortunately, SEUs may also occur if
the hit transistor is part of combinational logic, since a sufﬁciently
strong SET may propagate until it reaches a storage element where
it is latched. In any case, however, the errors resulting from SEUs
are not permanent but rather transient (i.e., can be corrected),
and are hence called soft-errors.
This paper presents an overview and ﬁrst results of our ap-
proach for developing suitable failure models for radiation-in-
duced transient failures of digital VLSI circuits in FATAL. It is
organized as follows.
In Section 2, we survey the current state of the art, while in Sec-
tion 3, we provide an overview of our general approach. As in [18–
20], it primarily rests on two lower-level simulation models, the 3D
model and the Spice model. The 3D model is a Synopsis 3D TCAD
model of our elementary target circuits, which include (a chain
of) inverters, Muller C-elements, etc. Particle hits are incorporated
via the SRIM–TRIM nuclear code simulation software [21]. In order
to calibrate the 3D model, which obviously also depends on tech-
nology parameters like doping proﬁles, we manufactured our tar-
get circuits in 90 nm UMC CMOS technology and performed
elaborate analog SET recording experiments under carefully con-
trolled microbeam irradiation at the GSI in Darmstadt [22].
In Section 4, we describe the current version of the Spice model,
which consists of the transistor schematic models of our target cir-
cuits augmented by Spice models that mimic SET generation in all
critical parts. For the latter, we use single-ended injection of a dou-
ble-exponential current into the source of a transistor [23]. Since
Spice model simulations are orders of magnitude faster than 3D
model simulations, the Spice model is a suitable tool for the thor-
ough (and reasonably fast) investigation of the SET behavior of any
digital circuit made up of an arbitrary combination of our elemen-
tary target circuits. This, in turn, is the appropriate basis for devis-
ing and calibrating/validating suitable digital radiation failure
models in FATAL.
Still, in order to rule out unnoticed modeling errors in the 3D
model and/or in the Spice model, and to validate the accuracy of
the digital failure model w.r.t. technology-related parameters like
transistor sizes and doping proﬁles, we are currently designing a
special digital FRad Chip that will allow us to do long-term digital
monitoring of radiation-induced failures in basic asynchronous cir-
cuits. Its design and pre-fabrication analysis/evaluation, based on a
detailed Spice model of the circuit according to the general FATAL
approach outlined above, are the main focus of this paper: In Sec-
tions 5 and 6, respectively, we describe and justify our selection of
the elementary radiation targets and the measurement architec-
ture to be incorporated in the FRad Chip. Section 7 is devoted to
the analysis of the resulting size requirements and the fault-toler-
ance properties of
the measurement architecture, Section 8

provides a simple probabilistic analysis based on cross-section
data inferred from our radiation experiments. Backed up by these
results, we conclude in Section 9 that we can indeed expect to
get meaningful measurement data from experiments using the
FRad Chip, which will be an important part of our future work in
this area.

2. Overview of SET-related research

Dependability concerns have stimulated a large body of re-
search work devoted to fault-tolerance in VLSI. Classically, faults
resulting from excessive manufacturing variabilities, aging and
wear-out are handled primarily by technological fault prevention
methods [12] and/or via fault detection and recovery approaches
[24]. Replication-based fault-tolerance methods like dual or triple
modular redundancy (DMR, TMR) have also been implemented, al-
beit only for very demanding applications.
During the last decades, radiation-induced SEEs became an
increasing concern in VLSI, see e.g. [13,20,14,25–28]. Besides per-
manent SEEs such as latch-up, threshold voltage shifts and even
destructive burn-outs in power semiconductors [15–17], this pri-
marily concerns transient SEEs. Formerly, SEEs caused problems
only in aerospace applications [16,15], where high-energy particles
are abundant due to cosmic rays interacting with the atmosphere.
However, the advent of nanometer-technology VLSI has dramati-
cally raised both the circuit complexity and clock speeds and de-
creased supply voltage and charges [26,13]. As a consequence,
overall, modern VLSI circuits show considerably higher soft-error
rates (SERs) nowadays, despite considerable improvements of pro-
cess technology. It has hence been reported that, despite the strong
decay of charged particles with atmospheric depth, the SERs of
chips operated at sea-level are also likely to exceed acceptable lim-
its [14,28].
At sea level, neutrons are the primary source of SEEs in VLSI
[29,14,30,31]. In addition, some a-induced SEEs are caused by
impurities in chip packaging materials, solder balls, etc. [14,32].
Various mitigation techniques, mostly using replication-based
fault-tolerance techniques, have been invented to reduce the SER
of modern VLSI chips.

2.1. SER assessment

Whereas SEUs and SERs in synchronous circuits have been/are
heavily studied [14,13,26,28], considerably less research has been
devoted to SETs. In particular, very little is known about SET gen-
eration and propagation in asynchronous circuits like (chains of)
Muller C-elements [33], which is the primary focus of FATAL.
In order to assess the SER of a circuit, a number of different ef-
fects must be considered jointly:
SET generation: 2D or even 3D physical modeling is used to ob-
tain the charge/current induced in a transistor in a certain technol-
ogy on a certain particle hit. Several ﬁnite element-based
simulation tools like DAVINCI
[34,35,20], DESSIS [18,36–38],
NanoTCAD [19,39], Synopsis SDevice [40,41] and Cadence Sentau-
rus-Device [42] have been employed for this purpose, also in
mixed-mode simulations with Spice models. Apart from ‘‘regular’’
SET generation [27,19,20], physical simulations and experiments
also revealed irregular phenomenons [43,44,41]. Note that 3D
modeling usually suffers from the unavailability of technology-re-
lated data like doping proﬁles, which are (at best) compensated by
calibrating the models, by e.g. using transistor models from manu-
facturer’s process design kits [38].
Moreover, there are several papers in literature that deal with
experimental SET measurements. Suitably designed radiation
targets (usually long inverter chains) are exposed to accelerated

774

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

radiation tests (using neutron [45] or heavy-ion [46–51,39,52,
53,44,41,43] beams) and/or laser-based failure injection [46,54,
55,49,56,51]. The resulting SETs are measured using several differ-
ent approaches: Besides indirect approaches based on SER mea-
surements [46,57–60], which use the correlation between SET
pulsewidth and the linear energy transfer (LET) of speciﬁc heavy-
ions, there are several different approaches for digital on-line
measurement of SET pulsewidths using variable delay latches
[48,47] or self-triggered inverter + latch chains [50,55,39,45,61].
A few papers also report on analog measurements of SET pulse-
widths by directly connecting a real-time oscilloscope [51,56,
49,36]. Our on-chip analog sense ampliﬁers [22] seem to be the
ﬁrst low-intrusive SET measurement attempt following the latter
approach.
Electrical masking: Analytic [62–64,37] or Spice models
[65,34,46,18,66,19] are used to describe the actual generation of
SETs, as well as SET propagation along a chain of gates, in particu-
lar,
in research on radiation-hardened circuit architectures.
Obviously, Spice models can also account for the fact that transis-
tors are not isolated, but rather employed within circuits. In fact,
SET pulses depend very much on operating conditions like
supply
strength
and driving
load,
temperature,
voltage,
[34,67,18,20,19,37,56,51].
Logical masking: Even a strong SET can be masked out in combi-
national logic, e.g., when arriving at an AND gate with some other
input at low. An accurate analysis of logical masking requires an
exhaustive classiﬁcation of all sensitive paths in a given combina-
tional logic [20]. Such an explicit modeling is of course expensive
(in [68], it is shown that computing the most reliability-critical
path is NP-hard); alternative approaches rely on fault injection
[69,18] and probabilistic modeling [66,70].
Temporal masking: In synchronous circuits, SETs originating
from combinational logic can only lead to SEUs if they propagate
to the ﬂip-ﬂops and arrive there within their setup and hold time.
Temporal masking is very effective if the latter are small relative to
the clock cycle [13,26,66,70,20,28]. However, due to ever increas-
ing clock frequencies, this assumption does no longer hold true,
and the problem is further exacerbated by SETs hitting the clock
drivers [71].
In asynchronous circuits, temporal masking effects are very dif-
ferent. Actually, temporal masking is tightly intertwined with log-
ical masking here: The ability of an asynchronous circuit like a
Muller C-element to memorize a (SET-)transition on some input
depends on its other input(s). In reasonably regular structures, like
bundled data or delay insensitive asynchronous pipelined architec-
tures, there are ways to analyze temporal masking similar to syn-
chronous circuits [54,10]. In general, however, an accurate analysis
of temporal masking in asynchronous systems requires an exhaus-
tive classiﬁcation of all paths involved in the completion detection
process and hence explicit modeling.
To combine all the above issues, hybrid modeling and simula-
tion are quite common: 2D/3D physics + Spice modeling is used
e.g. in [35,19,20], and an even more elaborate hierarchical frame-
work based on fault dictionaries is introduced in [18]. To compute
the SER of a given chip, simulation [72–74,14], probabilistic analy-
sis [66,73,70,20,26,71] as well as validating measurements
[31,58,18,59,66,75,13,61,72,76] have been used.
Obviously, such SER results allow the assessment of technology
scaling [72,13,56,75,26]. Essentially, the SER per gate resp. per bit
stays constant or slightly increases/decreases (there is no common
trend). The total SER per chip, however, has increased dramatically
[72,14] due to increasing chip complexity. Although technology
improvements (silicon on insulator (SOI), metal–insulator–metal
(MIM) caps, etc.) [77,19] are very effective for mitigating SEEs, they
are not sufﬁcient to maintain acceptable SERs. Moreover, they are
considered too expensive [14] for replacing bulk technology in

general, and there are also reports of unexpected effects like SET
pulse broadening during propagation [51].

2.2. SER mitigation techniques

Techniques for SEE mitigation are sometimes mandatory for
achieving acceptable SERs, even for devices operated at sea level.
Besides design hardening techniques (transistor sizing, layout)
[19], there is a broad spectrum of mitigation approaches [25]. Most
of them are based on ‘‘ﬁne-grained’’ fault tolerance. Examples are
the SEU-tolerant dual interlocked storage cell (DICE) [78], SET ﬁlter-
ing approaches [79,80] in latches, dual-rail data encoding like null-
convention logic (NCL) [10], or low-level replication [81]. Existing
architectural solutions are primarily based on error detection and
recovery/reconﬁguration: Examples are the popular EDAC-pro-
tected memory (EDAC stands for error detection and correction)
[25], deadlock detection in quasi delay insensitive (QDI) asynchro-
nous circuits [82,9], or space-hardened FPGAs [83]. For non-tran-
sient SEEs, mitigation techniques e.g. based on current sensors
for latch-up detection are also known [25]. Architectural fault-tol-
erance solutions based on DMR/TMR [7,8,84] or ingenious time
redundancy techniques [85] also exist.
One important effect that defeats most existing SET/SEU mitiga-
tion techniques are multiple upsets (MUs) and charge sharing ef-
fects [44].
In addition to the obvious fact
that billions of
(vulnerable) deep submicron transistors on a single chip make
multiple hits at different locations quite likely [86], there is also
an increased probability that a single particle hit upsets multiple
near-by transistors at the same time [72,59,76], or even generates
multiple SETs [41]. Besides statistical techniques [87] for extract-
ing MU statistics from SEU data in SRAMs, such data have also been
obtained via direct measurements [72,74,59]. Interestingly, it has
been observed that, unlike SEUs, MUs are very much directional-
dependent in anisotropic radiation ﬁelds [88]. Although advanced
VLSI
technology like SOI decreases the sensitivity to MUs
[76,13,19,77] as well, the problem cannot be mitigated by such
technological means alone. However, we are not aware of alterna-
tive mitigation technique for MUs (besides higher-redundancy
EDAC in memory arrays).
Particularly relevant in the FATAL context is the (relatively
sparse) existing work on fault-tolerant asynchronous circuits.
Asynchronous circuits have both advantages and disadvantages
with respect to fault-tolerance: All existing asynchronous ap-
proaches are inherently tolerant to (most) delay faults [54], but
are susceptible to deadlocks [82] and, even worse, to superﬂuous
transition generation [54]. Moreover, with respect to SETs, one
may expect that general asynchronous circuits intrinsically have
a higher SER since they may not beneﬁt much from temporal
masking effects. Several papers deal with SET/SEU sensitivity anal-
ysis of asynchronous circuits: QDI circuits and mitigation tech-
niques are dealt with in [8,54,89,84,9], NCL-based approaches are
considered in [10,90], and bounded delay solutions are dealt with
in [7]. For QDI circuits, we note that [54] describes a tool-based ap-
proach for sensitivity analysis. In addition, [9] investigates SET
propagation over state-holding elements in asynchronous circuits,
and introduces a design for fail-stop QDI asynchronous pipelines
that can deal with both SEUs and standard stuck-at faults.
Backed up by the above overview, we conclude that, despite the
large body of work on radiation-induced errors in VLSI, the avail-
able data is not sufﬁcient for deﬁning and validating failure models
for fault-tolerant asynchronous digital circuits.

3. FATAL general approach

The ultimate goal of FATAL is not the faithful and detailed mod-
eling of the generation and propagation of SETs/SEUs in a circuit

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

775

(which is the traditional approach, see e.g. [66]), but rather the
development of a digital failure model that focuses on the observable
behavior of a digital circuit under radiation, at some chosen level of
detail (see e.g. [65] for an early example of this approach). Never-
theless, developing a meaningful digital failure model primarily re-
quires means for validating and calibrating the failures predicted
by the model for certain operating conditions (which of course also
include radiation ﬁeld characteristics) w.r.t. the actual failures ob-
served in a real chip under these conditions.
As validating and calibrating candidate digital failure models
cannot reasonably be done by means of experiments with real cir-
cuits, due to lacking controllability and excessive measurement
times and efforts, we use an accurate Spice model for this purpose.
Spice models are in fact very convenient and hence widely used in
practice for similar goals, cp. [18–20], as they combine excellent
controllability with reasonably small simulation times. Our Spice
model consists of the analog models of our target circuits, which
include e.g. (a chain of) inverters and Muller C-elements (see
Section 5), augmented by additional Spice models that mimic SET
generation in critical transistors. For the latter, we use standard
single-ended injection of a double-exponential current [23] into
the transistor sources, see Section 4 for details. As witnessed by
the pre-design analysis of our FRad Chip (see Section 7), the Spice
model is indeed a suitable tool for the thorough (and reasonably
fast) investigation of the SET behavior of any digital circuit made
up of an arbitrary combination of our elementary target circuits.
In order to provide meaningful results, however, it is absolutely
instrumental for the Spice model to faithfully and accurately model
SET generation in a real circuit under given operating conditions.
For the same reasons as for the validation and calibration of digital
failure models, however, namely, lacking controllability and exces-
sive measurement times and efforts, we could not use experiments
for calibrating the Spice model either. This problem is solved by
using another model, the 3D model, which ﬁnally can be validated
experimentally.

microprobe facility allows a very accurate (sub-lm) deposition of
single ions, with well-known energy, at any location on the chip.
Our radiation experiments were performed with custom ASICs
fabricated in 90 nm UMC CMOS technology. They integrate some
of our target circuits (inverter chains and Muller C-elements) with
very high-speed analog sense ampliﬁers, as shown in Fig. 2. The
SET voltage pulses generated by the target circuits upon an ion
hit (which is detected by a channeltron at the microprobe facility)
are low-intrusively captured by the sense ampliﬁers and ﬁnally re-
corded by an external real-time oscilloscope.
For the inverter chain target circuit, we measured typical volt-
age pulses as shown in Fig. 3 for different impact positions of the
ions. It is important to mention that the resulting SETs do not only
depend on the impact position of the ion but also on the state of
the circuit: For the two different inverter input levels, quite differ-
ent behavior could be observed [22]: full-width half-maximum
(fwhm) pulse widths of up to 1.6 ns for a low (0) input level,
and up to 800 ps for a high (1) input level were observed, with
very small rise times.
Finally, calibration of the technology-dependent model param-
eters of the 3D model was done by means of ofﬂine comparison of
the SET voltage pulses predicted by the 3D device simulations and
the actual SET voltage pulses recorded in our experiments. Our ef-
forts resulted in 3D model predictions that match the experimental
data sufﬁciently well,3 such that we could use the predicted col-
lected amount of charge in the source contacts of the transistors
for calibrating the Spice model as described in Section 4.
More speciﬁcally, we could infer from the 3D model that the
amount of collected charge strongly depends on the impact posi-
tion of the ion. Approximately 300–350 fC are collected by the
source contact for worst case scenarios, resulting in SETs which
are capable to propagate. The corresponding rise times of the SET
voltage pulses at the output of the simulated inverter are in the
range of 10–70 ps.

3.1. The 3D model

3.2. The FRad Chip

Like in [18,19,38,20], we use 3D device simulations for calibrat-
ing and validating the Spice model. Relying on 3D models of our
elementary circuits, which are derived from the detailed ﬂoorplan
of a circuit in a given technology, these simulations allowed us to
accurately determine their behavior under heavy-ion radiation:
More technically, the charge generation along the ion track in the
silicon is modeled with the SRIM–TRIM nuclear code simulation
software [21]. The resulting charge generation proﬁle is then used
as an input for the Synopsis TCAD device simulator, which can
compute accurate SET current and voltage pulses. As a typical
example, Fig. 1 shows the 3D TCAD model of a single inverter
structure. In order to reduce the necessary number of mesh points,
the metal connections are not included in the 3D model but rather
considered using proper boundary conditions. This does not ad-
versely affect the quality of the simulations results, but saves a
lot of simulation time.
Unfortunately, accurate 3D device simulation also needs tech-
nology-related information, like doping proﬁles and well depths:
The SET generation process is very sensitive to those parameters.
Since such information is usually only known to the manufacturer
(and typically not disclosed to customers), the need arose to also
calibrate and validate the 3D model. Rather than using transistor
models provided in the manufacturer’s process design kits (PDK),
as done in [38], which are of questionable use for accurately cali-
brating the complex SET generation process, we conducted care-
fully controlled SET measurements [22] at the microprobe facility
at the GSI [91] in Darmstadt (Germany) for this purpose. A

Recall that the ultimate goal of FATAL is a digital failure model,
rather than the 3D model and the Spice model (which are—albeit
being of considerable independent interest—only intermediate
‘‘tools’’ here). In order to (i) spot possibly remaining modeling er-
rors in the digital failure model, and (ii) validate the accuracy of
the digital failure model w.r.t. technology parameters like transis-
tor sizes and doping proﬁles, we designed a custom ASIC called
FRad Chip, which combines a suitably rich target circuitry (made
up of our elementary circuits) and an elaborate digital measure-
ment unit. Rather than analog SET recording on a real-time oscillo-
scope [49], as used for validating our 3D models, the FRad Chip
incorporates only digital measurement circuitry that continuously
observes and counts radiation-induced failures occurring in the
target circuits. Unlike for SEUs, where bit-ﬂips in SRAM memory
arrays are a convenient means for collecting SEU statistics, see
e.g. [16], we are not aware of any comparable circuit in the litera-
ture. Its description and pre-fabrication analysis/evaluation using
the general FATAL approach outlined above are the primary focus
of this paper.
Ultimately, the FRad Chip will provide us with a means for the
‘‘end-to-end validation’’ of the accuracy of digital failure model
predictions by means of (long-term) radiation experiments.

3 Due to the very long simulation times of the complex 3D device simulations and
the huge amount of data recorded in our experiments, we are still reﬁning our
calibration. In fact, to increase the conﬁdence in the 3D model, we will conduct
additional measurement campaigns at the GSI microprobe facility, e.g., using heavy-
ions with different energies.

776

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

-3

Fig. 1. TCAD 3D Structure of an inverter (cutting plane through NMOS).

Fig. 2. Test chip schematics for calibration and validation of the 3D model and the spice model.
Z

1

Q P ðtÞ ¼

IP ðtÞdt ¼ I0 ðT a   T b Þ;
0


whereas the peak current of the SET (Ipeak) is given by
T a logðT b =T a Þ
T b logðT b =T a Þ
Ipeak ¼ I0 e
T a  T b   e
T a  T b

:

4. The Spice model for SETs

A number of Spice models have been proposed in literature
over the years, which model radiation hits via current injection.
Most proposed models agree in the qualitative deﬁnition, but dif-
fer in essential quantitative aspects [92]. Roche et al. [93] only
considered peak currents, which is not realistic for the time-vary-
ing restoring current, and also overestimates the critical charge
Qcrit. These issues have been addressed to some extent by Xu
et al. [94], by deﬁning Qcrit with respect to the static tripping point
of an SRAM cell; it fails to consider the corporate dynamics of
voltage transients at the struck node, however. Zhang et al. [95]
estimated Qcrit in terms of transistor parameters and injected cur-
rents, characterized by magnitude and duration, but observed a
discrepancy w.r.t. reality. One of the reasons is the use of a suit-
ably matched rectangular current pulse, instead of an exponential
one. Actually, so far the most agreed model to mimic the actual
charge deposition mechanism of a particle strike uses double
exponential currents [96,38,42], so we adopt it for our analysis
as well.
More speciﬁcally, for injecting SETs in a transistor of our target
circuits, we use a current source connected to the source of the
transistor that generates a double-exponential current pulse
according to the following equation [97]:
IP ðtÞ ¼ I0 ðe t=T a   e t=T b Þ:

ð1Þ

Herein, IP denotes the transient current pulse, I0 the peak current of
the two exponential terms, Ta the decay time (fall time) of the cur-
rent pulse, and Tb the time constant for initially establishing the ion
track (rise time). Easy calculations reveal that the total charge QP of
such a pulse is

ð2Þ

ð3Þ

All our simulation experiments were conducted using HSPICE and
Cadence Spectre simulators.
We executed a number of initial simulations using an inverter
chain as our target circuit for calibrating the parameters I0, Ta
and Tb. Our goal is to determine a parameter setting which leads
to SET voltage pulses (resp. critical charges Qcrit) that mimic the
ones measured (resp. predicted by the 3D model) according to Sec-
tion 3.1 as faithfully as possible. Recall that the measured SET volt-
age pulse lengths ranged up to 800 ps (resp. 1.6 ns) for logic high
inverter input (resp. low input), with Qcrit in the range of 300–
350 fC. We varied the current model parameters I0, Ta and Tb until
both (a) Qcrit = QP according to Eq. (2) and (b) the SET voltage pulse
lengths predicted by Spice matched reasonably well.
In order to get some basic understanding of the transformation
of an analog current pulse in an inverter to a digital voltage pulse at
the output, Fig. 4 plots the length of the SET voltage pulse observed
at the buffered inverter output over I0, for ﬁxed4 Ta = 100 ps and
Tb = 10 ps; this results in a peak current of Ipeak = 0.78I0 according
to Eq. (3). There is already a digitally visible SET with a length of
125 ps for I0 = 1 mA, while for I0 between 2 mA and 10 mA the length
of the observed digital SET grows (approximately logarithmically)
from 540 ps to 1.4 ns. For I0 = 3.33 mA, (a) Eq. (2) reveals an injected

4 The simple dependence in Fig. 4 would not hold if the timing parameters Ta, Tb
were also varied.

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

777

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. Measured SET voltage pulses (inverter) under heavy-ion (197Au, 946 MeV)
irradiation [22]: SETs for (a) low (0), (b) high (1) inputs.

Fig. 4. Length of SET vs. exponential peak current I0.

charge of about QP = 300 fC, matching our Qcrit, and (b) Fig. 4 reveals
an SET voltage pulse length of 800 ps that is also in the right order of
magnitude.
Indeed, ﬁne-tuning of the model parameters provided us with
maximum SET voltage pulses of 800 ps for a high inverter input,
which nicely matches our measurement results. For a low inverter
input, the maximum SET duration we could generate with our

choice of model parameters is 980 ps, which somewhat underesti-
mates our longest measured SET durations. We conjecture that this
is, in part, an artefact of the lack of parasitic capacitance in the
Spice model of the target circuits taken from UMC’s PDK. It may
also be a sign of the need of some structural improvement of the
double exponential current model (cp. [66,19]), however.
It must be noted here that there are inherent fundamental dif-
ferences between 3D model and Spice model that render a perfect
matching of the pulse shape ultimately impossible: The Spice mod-
el shall represent the complex charge deposition (and collection)
process, which is—apart from the characteristics of the particle
impact as such—determined by various and highly non-linear
‘‘current paths’’, by a single current source with a more or less
pre-determined current shape, which provides only a few parame-
ters for tuning. When applying such a substantially simpliﬁed
model to (purposely) abstract away details, one cannot expect a
perfect representation of reality. The 3D model, on the other hand,
is much more powerful in this respect, but its high computational
complexity makes it practically impossible to also incorporate the
entire relevant ‘‘context’’ of the hit transistor in the circuitry
(which, however, determines the transformation of the current
pulse into a voltage pulse and its propagation).
The single-source double exponential current model employed
in our Spice model represents the current state-of-the-art, which
has been considered a suitable tradeoff between tractable com-
plexity and sufﬁcient accuracy in most of the related research
work. For compatibility with this research, and also due to lacking
alternatives, we simply had to accept the artefacts mentioned
above. However, part of our envisioned future work in this area
will be devoted to alternative Spice models, which provide better
modeling accuracy with still acceptable complexity.

5. Selection of radiation target circuits

The speciﬁc purpose of the FRad Chip leads to the following de-
sign requirements and constraints:

 There is no need to capture analog effects.
 The transformation of analog effects to the digital domain obvi-
ously inﬂuences digital observations. In order to be as realistic
as possible, this transformation shall solely be performed by
the target circuits (implicitly).
 In order to get relevant results, we need to select target circuits
that are elementary and/or frequently used in practice.
 To explore the behavior of target circuits both in dynamic and
steady state, we need the option of exercising/stimulating the
targets when exposed to radiation.
 We want to apply sources of radiation whose characteristics is
similar to what circuits are typically exposed to in practice.
These sources have in common that (a) time and location of par-
ticle hits are not controllable, (b) the particle hit rate is reason-
ably low, and (c) the target has to be brought into some
environment (e.g., a radiation chamber) that is spatially con-
ﬁned. This substantially impacts the design of the overall mea-
surement infrastructure.

Considering these issues, we have decided for a set of target cir-
cuits that will be detailed below.

5.1. Inverter chain

Inverters are the most basic and simple elements in CMOS and
thus the preferred radiation targets in the existing literature. For a
given transistor sizing, they are also the fastest CMOS circuits, thus
potentially vulnerable to even very short SETs.
Incorporating

778

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

A

Z

(A)

A

Z

A

Z

(B)

(C)

A

CLK

D Q

D

Q

D

Q

D

Q

QD

D Q

A

C

(D)

C

C

C

C

(E)

Fig. 5. Gate level schematics of target circuits.

Q

B

Z

inverters in our study is hence not only relevant in practice, but
also allows us to compare our results to literature. In order to have
a reasonably large target area and a rich testbed for investigating
propagation effects, we provide a chain of 17 inverters, as shown
in Fig. 5A (in fact, multiple instances thereof).

5.2. NAND–NOR tree

NAND trees have always been a topic of interest in terms of
testing and SETs. NAND and NOR implementations are slightly
more complex than inverters and therefore exhibit different phe-
nomena. One is the availability of two inputs, which allows us to
form a tree structure. Another one is the possibility of logical mask-
ing of errors.
We have 64 NAND gates in the ﬁrst stage that are all driven by a
single input signal, which allows us to jointly stimulate activity
with minimal overhead. The outputs of the NAND gates fan-in as
inputs for NOR gates and so on, yielding a tree with 127 gates in
total, see Fig. 5B. The tree has seven levels, hence in the fault-free
case the output will be the inverse of the input.

5.3. XNOR tree

The XNOR gate forms the equivalent of the logical OR for tran-
sitions, another very basic functionality in asynchronous circuits
and also fundamental for parity checking circuits. Compared to
NAND/NOR gates, it has a very different internal structure. We em-
ploy an XNOR gate implementation based on a CMOS transmission
gate with inverter.
We again use a seven level tree structure. It is apparent from
Fig. 5C that two outputs of XNOR gates fan-in to an XNOR gate at
the next level. The inputs of the 64 XNOR gates in the ﬁrst stage
are again all connected to a single input. Due to the XNOR function
all gates will therefore, independently from this input, present a lo-
gic 1 at their outputs, and the tree output will transiently go to low
only in case of an SET somewhere in the tree. As we will see, this
behavior is very convenient for our purposes.

5.4. Flip-ﬂop chain

Flip-ﬂops are the fundamental building blocks of virtually every
synchronous design. Like inverters, they have hence received much

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

779

attention in radiation-related research in the past, which will allow
us to compare our results against existing data. As shown in
Fig. 5D, we provide a chain of 33 edge-triggered master–slave D-
ﬂip-ﬂops, which are implemented using transmission gates and
inverters.

5.5. Elastic pipeline

An elastic pipeline is built from Muller C-elements and inverters
as shown in Fig. 5E. A Muller C-element is the fundamental build-
ing block in the design of self-timed digital circuits [98]. Although
it can be viewed as a (combinational) AND for transitions, it is a
state-holding element much like an asynchronous set-reset latch.
Three different CMOS implementations have become popular, all
of which we will use as target circuits:

(a) CMOS implementation introduced by Van Berkel [99], see
Fig. 6a.
(b) CMOS implementation using an inverter latch introduced by
Martin [99], see Fig. 6b.
(c) Conventional pull-up pull-down CMOS implementation
introduced by Sutherland [99], see Fig. 6c.

The elastic pipeline in Fig. 5E is essentially a FIFO buffer for
signal transitions that is often used in handshake-based circuits.
The C-elements in the pipeline propagate the signals in a carefully
controlled way that maintains the integrity of each wave [99,100].
The speed of signal propagation is determined by the actual delays
of the circuit.
The most interesting property of the circuit is that it is delay-
insensitive, i.e., it works correctly regardless of wire and gate
delays. Since many asynchronous designs are based on elastic
pipelines, its behavior in the presence of radiation effects (SET gen-
eration, propagation and latching) is of utmost relevance. As we
will see later on, beyond being an attractive target, elastic pipelines
are also useful as measurement circuits.

6. Measurement architecture

The measurement architecture of the FRad Chip must facilitate
the continuous monitoring and recording of all occurring SETs, at
the level of digital signals, in statistical long-term experiments.
To get as much information as possible from an experiment, as
many nodes in our target circuits (abbreviated DUT, for device

under test in the sequel) as possible must be monitored simulta-
neously. At the same time, the number of monitored nodes is lim-
ited by the available die area and the number of pins of the FRad
Chip.
On-chip preprocessing is used to reconcile these requirements:
(i) We extract SET occurrences out of the possibly superposed dy-
namic operation of the DUTs as early as possible. (ii) Since we are
not interested in the precise time of occurrence of SETs in statisti-
cal analysis, it sufﬁces to just count the number of SETs in consec-
utive measurement periods, at the end of which the counts will be
transferred to some off-chip data recording unit and be reset. (iii)
To save pins, the data transfer will be performed serially after par-
allel/serial conversion (PISO). (iv) Since DUTs and on-chip prepro-
cessing circuitry compete for the same die area, the latter must be
as lean as possible.
Fig. 7 shows the structure of the resulting FRad Chip architec-
ture. Notice the strict separation between target circuits, measure-
ment circuits and PISO that may turn out helpful in specialized
ion-beam experiments, in which radiation hits can be restricted
to a certain area.
We want to investigate SET generation in our DUTs both in sta-
tic and in dynamic mode. For the latter, we provide a common data
signal that can be used to collectively stimulate switching activity.
Recall that the XNOR tree has the beneﬁcial property of exhibiting
activity at its output only in case of a particle hit. Therefore, it is
sufﬁcient to use a simple incrementer for counting SETs here.
Unfortunately, not all our other DUTs exhibit this nice behavior.
Since the generation of the stimuli is under our control, however,
we can easily provide a correct reference signal for comparison/
subtraction purposes. This may be achieved by a simpliﬁed version
of the DUT (even a simple wire or an inverter does the job, since all
our DUTs except the XNOR tree exhibit a behavior equivalent to
that of a wire or inverter) or by another instance of the same
DUT. In principle, any mismatch between the DUT output and
the reference signal can be extracted by an XOR, whose output
feeds the SET counter, see Fig. 8a. The problem here is that the
XOR tends to produce glitches in case of a non-zero skew between
DUT and reference, thus potentially leading to spurious counts.
Considering that we are not interested in the exact temporal
matching of the behaviors of DUT and reference, but rather in
matching their signal traces, a more appropriate solution is an
up/down counter, with the DUT output feeding one input and
the reference signal feeding the other one, see Fig. 8b. Obviously,
we cannot use a synchronous up/down counter, since SETs would
not
adhere
to
setup/hold constraints
and hence
cause

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 6. Transistor level schematics of: (a) Van Berkel, (b) weak-feedback, (c) conventional Muller C-elements.

780

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

CLK

S
D
A
P
 
 
 
O
/
I

TES

D
D
V

t
u
O
 
l
a
i
r
e
S
 
n
I
 
l
e
l
l
a
r
a
P

I/O   PADS

D
N
G

t
u
O
 
l
a
i
r
e
S
 
n
I
 
l
e
l
l
a
r
a
P

Parallel In Serial Out

Measurement
Circuits

Target
Circuits

Measurement
Circuits

Parallel In Serial Out

A

I/O   PADS

2
T
S
R

Fig. 7. Structure of the chip.

Z

S
D
A
P
 
 
 
O
/
I

TSR

metastability. Moreover, in order to catch even short SETs, our
counters should be as fast and sensitive as possible. Fortunately,
there is a nice and area efﬁcient way of building an asynchronous
up/down counter for transitions that is based on an elastic pipe-
line. Fig. 11c illustrates its principle.
Alternatively, we may use an incrementer as well to count the
transitions performed by the DUT during a measurement period.
However, in this case, we will see the sum of transitions due to
the SETs in the DUT plus those due to the regular DUT switching
activity. As the stimuli applied to the DUT are under our full con-
trol, we can subtract the latter a posteriori; the incrementer must
accommodate a much larger count value, though.
Being on-chip, the measurement circuitry will be exposed to
radiation just like the DUTs and hence has to operate properly in
the presence of particle hits. Recall that the FRad Chip is not pri-
marily designed for being used under microbeam irradiation, but
rather with any radiation source. There are many options available
for making a circuit tolerant against these single, uncorrelated par-
ticle hits, such as TMR [101], coding [102], time redundancy [103],

or radiation hardening [79]. However, all of those tend to cause
high overheads (at least 200%), thus rendering a pretty large share
of the die area unusable for additional DUTs. Considering that both
proposed types of counters resemble interesting target structures
by themselves (namely, a ﬂip-ﬂop chain as well as an elastic pipe-
line), we decided not to mask particle hits in these circuits but
rather to let them occur: This effectively turns the on-chip mea-
surement infrastructure into an additional radiation target. The
remaining challenge is, however, to ﬁnd a clever arrangement that
allows us to distinguish between errors that occurred in the origi-
nal target circuit and those in the counters. To this end, we use the
following three strategies:

 For our SET counters, we employ a Linear Feedback Shift Register
(LFSR) instead of a simple incrementer. The important beneﬁt of
doing so is that the counting sequence in a (carefully chosen)
LFSR always involves multiple bit changes per count, hence a
single bit ﬂip caused by an SEU will lead to a dramatic change
in the count sequence that is easily recognizable by an a poste-
riori analysis.
 To make sure that we have a correct copy of the count available
even in case of a counter hit, we use duplication. Since, thanks
to using an LFSR counter, we can identify the corrupted value,
there is no need to go for triplication.
 For the difference counter, we cannot rely on recognizing erro-
neous counts. Duplication just allows us error detection but not
recovery. A viable alternative is using an up/down counter in
combination with an LFSR counter (which must be quite wide
then, of course). This will not only allow recovery of the correct
count, but will also provide diversity that might turn out very
beneﬁcial in a radiation environment.

Fig. 9 shows the ﬁnally chosen architectures. For the XNOR tree,
we simply use two LFSR counters in parallel, as shown in Fig. 9a.
Although we expect only few hits per DUT in a measurement per-
iod on average (see Section 8), we decided to go for a 16-bit LFSR
(for details see below) in order to retain a sufﬁciently long counting
sequence; this makes the recognition of incorrect counts more reli-
able. By using two LFSR counters, we make sure that we have a cor-
rect count available in case one LFSR has been hit.
For all the other target circuits, we use the architecture shown
in Fig. 9b. It comprises three DUTs of the same type, which we
mutually use as a reference. For example, the behavior of DUT2 is
observed by the two up/down counters UDC1 and UDC2. Note that
these counters have different references (DUT1 and DUT3, respec-
tively) and use different polarity (UDC1 counting down and UDC2
counting up on output transitions of DUT2). In principle, this archi-
tecture allows us to tolerate any of the two up/down counters
becoming faulty. However, as we cannot be sure to safely recognize
every SEU of an up/down counter, it may (in rare cases) happen

A

DEVICE
UNDER
TEST

A

DEVICE
UNDER
TEST

LFSR
COUNTER

Z

32Z−

1

UP
DOWN
COUNTER

+
−

9X−X
1

DEVICE
UNDER
TEST

(a)

DEVICE
UNDER
TEST

(b)

Fig. 8. Extracting SET occurrences from the observed activity by (a) XOR or (b) difference counter.

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

781

A

DUT 3

O3

LFSR 2

W −W
1 
32

A

DUT

O1

(a)

LFSR 1

LFSR 2

X −X
1
16

DUT 1

O1

Y −Y
1
16

DUT 2

2O

(b)

+
−

+
−

UDC 2

UDC 1

LFSR 1

X  −X
1

9

1Y −Y9

Z −Z
1

32

Fig. 9. Proposed measurement architectures for (a) XNOR tree; (b) all other target circuits.

that we end up with two counts indicating different numbers of
SETs, which without additional information are both plausible.
For DUT1, we use a different strategy: Its behavior is ob-
served by both UDC1 (counting up) and an LFSR counter. The
beneﬁt here is that, as motivated above, we can trust to recog-
nize any faulty behavior of the latter. So in case the LFSR coun-
ter indicates a plausible number of SET occurrences in the
target, we can simply trust it, while otherwise we still have
the result of UDC1 as a backup. Here we need a 32-bit LFSR
for reasonably long measurement periods without wrap-around
(42 s for a 100 MHz input data stimulus), which we consider
necessary for a safe recognition of counter hits. Finally, we
use the same strategy for DUT3.
Given the relatively low hit rate (according to Section 8, we will
tune measurement period and radiation intensity to experience
only a few hits per period), our general strategy in interpreting
an observed scenario is to assume the lowest possible number of
hits that could have led to the given observation. Considering,
e.g., that UDC1 counts up for failures in DUT1 while it counts down
for those in DUT2, one might argue that SET observations may can-
cel out each other. This is, however, not the case, since we have
redundant information in UDC2 and the LFSR counter. With this
combined information, it is possible to accurately identify every
single hit, all double hits in both the target and the measurement
circuits, and even many multiple hits correctly (for details see Sec-
tion 7.5). Backed up by the probabilistic calculations in Section 8,
we are convinced that our architecture represents an excellent
choice with respect to the combined criteria of area efﬁciency, fault
tolerance, diagnosability and diversity. Overall, it clearly surpasses
the more evident solutions using three LFSR counters or three up/
down counters.
In the following we will present some details of our SET counter
implementations.

Compared to conventional binary counters [105], an LFSR reduces
the amount of required logic and minimizes routing complexity.
With feedbacks forming a ‘‘maximum length polynomial’’, an LFSR
with n ﬂip-ﬂops can implement a 2n   1 state counter [104,106].
Two circuit structures can be used to implement a given polyno-
mial, namely, the many-to-one design and the one-to-many
design.
We selected the 32-degree polynomial x32 + x22 + x2 + x + 1
shown in Fig. 10 and the 16-degree polynomial x16 + x14
+ x13 + x11 + 1 for our measurement architecture. We chose a one-
to-many design based on XNOR gates for both, since the associated
count sequence involves many bit changes per step, which is ben-
eﬁcial for detecting a single bit fault.

6.2. Up–down counters

Our SET up/down counters will be implemented as 9-stage
pipelines made up of Muller C-elements [107] with weak feedback
inverters. Inputs A and B in Fig. 5E are used as up and down count
inputs, connected to the DUTs; the output Z is not used. In order to
enable the possibility of counting down, we preset the pipeline to a
value of 5 upon reset. For this purpose, we need to add extra tran-
sistors (with appropriate sizing) to the C-elements as shown in
Fig. 11a and b.
The up/down counter utilizing the two versions of the C-ele-
ments (with set and rst) and inverters is shown in Fig. 11c. The
outputs Z1–Z5 are preset to 1, while Z6–Z9 are preset to 0; all bot-
tom-row C-elements are initialized to 0. A transition on UP will add
to the transitions already present in the pipeline, while a transition
at DOWN will remove one transition from the pipe, thus decreasing
the count.

6.1. Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR) based counters

An LFSR is a synchronous shift register with XOR gates forming
selected feedbacks [104], which produces a deterministic and peri-
odic pseudo-random counting sequence. It is heavily used in prac-
tice for generating CRC checksums and pseudo-random bit strings.

The goal of this section is to provide an overview and some re-
sults of our pre-fabrication analysis of the proposed measurement
architecture of the FRad chip. Apart from area considerations, our
primary concern is an evaluation of the resilience against particle
hits.

7. Evaluation and analysis

782

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

QD

D

Q

D

Q

QD

QD

QD

CLK

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q22

Q23

Q32

Fig. 10. 32-bit LFSR.

A

B

B

A

Z

VDD

set

(b)

A

B

B

A

VDD

rst

Z

(a)

C

S

UP

C

S

C

R

C

R
DOWN

C

S

9Z

Z8

(c)

C

S

2Z

1Z

Fig. 11. Schematic of (a) Muller C-element with reset (rst), (b) Muller C-element with set (set) and (c) up/down counter.

Table 1
Number of transistors for different architectures.

Architecture

Total no. of transistors

17-Inverter chain
33-Flip-ﬂop chain
128-input NAND–NOR Tree
128-input XNOR tree
35 C-element Van-Berkel elastic pipeline
35 C-element Weak-Feedback elastic pipeline
35 C-element conventional elastic pipeline
16-bit LFSR counter
32-bit LFSR counter
9-bit Up/down counter

34
594
508
1016
490
350
490
440
856
187

measurement setup. The exception to this is the XNOR tree target,
one instance of which is monitored by two 16-bit LFSR counters.
The resulting area consumption and the overhead incurred by
the measurement circuits over the target circuits are given in Ta-
ble 2. Note that the only substantial overhead incurred by the mea-
surement setup occurs for the inverter chains, which is due to the
small size of the target. For the other target circuits, the measure-
ment overhead is very reasonable. On average, the measurement
circuitry consumes 19% more area (in fact fewer transistors) than
the target circuits. Given that our SET counters can also be seen
as additional target circuits in our architecture, the overhead is
acceptable.

7.1. Overhead analysis

Table 1 lists the total number of transistors required by the dif-
ferent target circuits described in Section 5 and the SET counters
introduced in Section 6.
The FRad Chip hosts three instances of each target circuit, two
32-bit LFSR counters and two up/down counters for every

The primary tool for the analysis of our measurement circuits’
resilience against particle hits is simulation-based fault injection,
using appropriate Spice models as described in Section 4. To get
conﬁdence in our architecture, we injected faults in each and every
gate of each SET counter and analyzed the resulting behavior of the
circuit.

7.2. Fault-tolerance analysis setup

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

783

Table 2
Hardware overhead analysis for measurement setup.

Table 4
LFSR counter – SETs in XNOR gates and ﬂip-ﬂops.

Architecture

No. of trans.
for target circuits

No. of trans.
for measurement
circuits

Overhead factor
(target circuit
circuits as base)

Inverter chain
Flip-ﬂop chain
NAND–NOR tree
XNOR tree
Elastic pipeline
All

102
1782
1524
3048
1330
7786

2086
2086
2086
880
2086
9224

20.451
1.171
1.369
0.289
1.568
1.185

We used release 5.10.41 of the Cadence Virtuoso Front-end to
Back-end design environment to create the schematics of our cir-
cuits. They were all designed using UMC 90 nm NMOS and PMOS
device models. We chose custom W/L (width/length) ratios for
the NMOS transistors, while the W/L ratios of the PMOS transistors
were chosen based on the structure of the corresponding circuit.
The Spice netlists were extracted from the respective Cadence
schematics.
We performed all our analog simulations using HSPICE Version
D-2010, using the following setup: To generate switching activity
in the circuits, we toggled the data input every 5 ns. After 10 ns,
we triggered the set and reset signals of the counters for about
40 ns, which initializes the LFSR counter to 0 and the up/down
counters to 5. At speciﬁcally selected times during normal opera-
tion, we triggered SETs by injecting a current pulse in the Spice
netlist (refer to Section 4).

7.3. LFSR counter evaluation

The regular operation of the 32-bit LFSR is illustrated in Table 3:
With each rising clock edge, the counting proceeds by one step; the
32-bit LFSR will step through a sequence of about 4.2 billion differ-
ent values. A low at the RST input resets the count value to 0.
For our fault-tolerance analysis, we injected faults in each of the
XNOR gates and ﬂip-ﬂops independently. Selected results are listed
below (see also Table 4):

 Injection of an SET causing a bit ﬂip from 1 to 0 in the XNOR
gate tapped between Q1 and Q2 (please refer to Fig. 10) at
75 ns: Here the beneﬁt of using an LFSR for counting becomes
apparent. While only one bit of the output actually changes
due to the SET, the related change in the counting sequence is
drastic and hence easily recognizable: According to Table 3
the value following 29,360,146 should be 62,914,594, but here
it is 29,360,144, effectively causing a huge jump in the counter
sequence (see rightmost column).
 Injection of an SET causing a bit ﬂip from 0 to 1 in the ﬂip-ﬂop
with output Q15 at 80 ns: This increased the LFSR count by 215
and the actual count by 1.64 billion steps approximately. Again
this is easy to detect.

Overall, this conﬁrms that a single bit ﬂip in the LFSR counter is
witnessed as billions of skipped transitions. Due to our careful

Table 3
Operation of the LFSR counter in no-fault scenario.

Time (ns)

0–10
10–50
50–60
60–70
70–80
80–90
90–100

LFSR count

4194310
0
4194310
12582922
29360146
62914594
130023490

Actual count

1
0
1
2
3
4
5

Time (ns)

LFSR count

Actual count

XNOR gate tapped between Q1 and Q2
12582922
60–70
29360146
70–75
75–80
29360144
62914598
80–90

Flip-ﬂop with output Q15
60–70
70–80
80–90
90–100

12582922
29360146
62947362
130089026

2
3
2325803548
2325803549

2
3
1647004572
1647004573

selection of the LFSR polynomial, its one-to-many implementation
(see Section 5), and backed up by numerous further experiments,
we can indeed generalize this observation: A single bit ﬂip in any
LFSR cell will always infer a much larger and hence easily detect-
able effect in the actual count, which ﬁnally justiﬁes our decision
to use an LFSR counter.

7.4. Up/down counter evaluation

In our analysis, SETs were injected into all C-elements and
inverters to evaluate the resulting behavior of the up/down coun-
ter introduced in Section 6. Table 5 lists some of the scenarios ob-
tained (e.g. at 75 ns and 105 ns). Recall that the up/down counters
are initialized to a count of 5, represented by 111110000 on
Z9    Z1 in Fig. 11c. A fault injected at 130 ns in the C-element that
drives the output Z8, e.g., changed the outputs Z6, Z7 and Z8 to 1.
There were also many instances when the fault injected at the
same node in a different time interval just changed the output Z8
temporarily to 1 (for one step) and switched back to 0.
Overall, we observe that the effect of an SET in an up/down
counter is dependent on the location and the direction of the
resulting bit ﬂip. Unlike in the LFSR case, the initial effect of the
fault is not ‘‘ampliﬁed’’, such that a particle hit in the up/down
counter cannot easily be distinguished from a regular counting
step caused by an SET in the associated target. This conﬁrms that
some kind of replication is indeed mandatory for using these coun-
ters in our measurement architecture.

7.5. Overall measurement architecture and fault dictionary

We have created a comprehensive fault dictionary for our
measurement architecture, which associates every fault scenario

Table 5
Fault analysis of the up/down counter.

Time (ns)

Up/down count

Actual count

C-element (with set) between the outputs Z4 and Z5
111110000
65–70
70–75
000001111
111100000
75–80
80–85
000011111

C-element (with rst) at output Z5
111110000
95–100
100–105
000001111
111100000
105–110
110–115
000011111

C-element (with set) at output Z8
111110000
120–125
000001111
125–130
130–135
000000001
111111110
135–140

5
5
4
4

5
5
4
4

5
5
8
8

784

Table 6
Fault dictionary.

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

Observed syndrome

Location of faults

U1

U2

No fault scenario
5
5

Single fault scenario
5
6
4
6
4
5
⁄
5
⁄
5
5
5
5
5

L1
p

+
p
p
p
p
X
p

L2
p

p
p
+
p
p
p
X

Double faults scenario
Location of all faults traceable
Problematic triple fault scenarios
p
⁄
5
X
p
p
⁄
⁄
p
⁄
5
X
Problematic quadruple fault scenarios
p
⁄
⁄
+
⁄
6
+
X
p
⁄
⁄
X
p
⁄
6
X
p
⁄
5
X
⁄
5
X
X
p
⁄
⁄
+
p
⁄
5
X
p
⁄
4
X
p
⁄
⁄
X
p
⁄
⁄
X
p
⁄
⁄
X
⁄
5
X
X

Actual location

Interpretation

–

D1
D2
D3
U1
U2
L1
L2

(U1, L1, D1)
(U1, U2, D2)
(U2, L2, D3)

(D1, D2, U2, U1)
(D1, D3, U2, L2)
(D1, U1, U2, L1)
(D1, D2, U1, L1)
(D1, D2, U2, L2)
(D1, U1, L1, L2)
(D2, D3, U1, U2)
(D2, D3, U1, L2)
(D2, D3, U2, L2)
(D2, U1, U2, L1)
(D2, U1, U2, L2)
(D3, U1, U2, L2)
(D3, U2, L1, L2)

–

D1
D2
D3
U1
U2
L1
L2

(U1, L1)
(U1, U2)
(U2, L2)

(D1, U2, U1)
(D1, U2, L2)
(U1, U2, L1)
(U1, D2, L1)
(D1, U2, L2)
(U1, L2, L1)
(D3, U2, U1)
(L2, U1)
(D2, U2, L2)
(U1, U2, L1)
(U1, U2, L2)
(U1, U2, L2)
(U2, L1, L2)

(single or multiple SET hit (s) in counters and targets) with its
‘‘syndrome’’, i.e., the set (U1, U2, L1, L2) of resulting readouts on the
up/down counters UDC1 and UDC2, as well as the LFSRs 1 and 2.
Used in the reverse direction, this dictionary allows us to infer from
an observed syndrome the fault scenario that caused it, with, e.g.
(U1, L2, D2) indicating that UDC1, LFSR2 and DUT2 have been affected
by an SET. This mapping, unfortunately, is not bijective, as different
multiple-fault scenarios may map to the same syndrome. We use
two strategies to handle this issue: (1) By carefully choosing the
measurement period (see Section 8), we can safely neglect the
probability of experiencing many SET hits within one period (i.e.,
before reading out and re-initializing the counters). This allows
us to ignore fault scenarios involving more than, e.g., four SETs in
our dictionary. The same reasoning supports our strategy (2),
namely, associating an observed syndrome with the scenario that
involves the lowest number of faults, as it is far more probable to
occur than other matching scenarios that might exist. Of course,
however, this can lead to misinterpretation in rare cases.5
Table 6 shows an excerpt of our fault dictionary. Herein ‘‘⁄’’ and
‘‘X’’ both indicate an incorrect counter value, with the latter being
p
recognizable as an error and the former not. ‘‘
’’ indicates that the
expected LFSR value for the fault free case is read, ‘‘+’’ stands for a
correctly incremented LFSR value.
It turns out that our architecture facilitates correct identiﬁca-
tion of the hit circuit for all single faults. The same is true for all
double faults (not shown for brevity). Furthermore, most of the tri-
ple faults and even quadruple faults are correctly identiﬁed; the
few problematic cases that lead to a wrong interpretation are
shown in the table. In the case when all four counters are hit, we
do not have any useful information left, of course.

7.6. SET simulations of the measurement infrastructure

To give a brief overview of our Spice analysis performed to val-
idate our architecture, we present an example considering an in-
verter chain as the DUT, using the measurement architecture
from Fig. 9. We injected SETs in all the three target circuits DUT1,
DUT2, DUT3 at different times, observable at outputs O1, O2, O3 in
Fig. 12: An SET is injected at 117 ns in DUT2, at 147 ns in DUT1
and at 177 ns in DUT3. The effect of these SETs in the up/down
counters and the LFSR counters can be inferred from Figs. 12–14.
More speciﬁcally, the effect of the SET injected at 117 ns can be
observed in UDC1 (refer to signals Y1–Y9 of the UDC in Fig. 12) and
in LFSR1 (refer to Fig. 13). The effect of the fault injected at 147 ns
in DUT1 can be observed in UDC1 and UDC2 (refer to signals Y1–Y9
and X1–X9 in Fig. 12). Similarly, the fault injected at 177 ns in
DUT3 can be observed in UDC2 (refer to signals X1–X9 in Fig. 12)
and in LFSR2 (refer to Fig. 14). One notices that, at 190 ns, the SETs
injected in the target circuits cancelled the counts of UDC1 and
UDC2, thus bringing them back to the initial state. However, the ef-
fect of the SETs in DUT2 and DUT3 is still observable in LFSR1 and
LFSR2, respectively.
More speciﬁcally, assuming that these were the only three SETs
observed in this target circuit during the measurement period of 40 s,
we will observe no change in the UDCs and one extra count in both
the LFSRs at the end of the measurement period. From these
values, we can infer that the faults did not occur in LFSR1 or LFSR2:
If a fault occurred in the LFSR, then there would not be just one
extra count but millions of extra counts. From the LFSR’s values
we can thus infer that the fault occurred in the target circuits
DUT2 and DUT3 and thus explain the SET’s effect in the UDCs:
Based on their values, we deduce that the SET in DUT1 cancelled
the effect of SETs created by DUT2 and DUT3 in the UDCs. This is
how we determined the corresponding entry in the fault dictionary
in Table 6.
Our fault dictionary has been validated by means of numerous
simulated SET injections (up to seven at a time) into various loca-
tions, using the same process as explained above. We are hence
convinced that the chosen measurement architecture will indeed
work as expected.

8. Probabilistic analysis

Given the non-negligible number of transistors IM of the mea-
surement circuitry M as compared to the number of transistors IT
of the target circuitry T in Table 2 in Section 7 on one hand, and
the ability of M to tolerate just a double hit for sure6 on the other
hand, the question about feasible measurement periods D = D(/)
for a given particle ﬂux / (in particles per lm2 s) arises: D must
be chosen small enough such that, with reasonably high probability,
there are at most two hits in M during D; we call such a measure-
ment period safe. At the same time, with reasonably high probability,
two consecutive hits in T should occur within some P safe measure-
ment periods sufﬁciently often, in order to get statistically meaning-
ful data on the SET generation process.
A gross estimate of D and P can be determined using cross sec-
tion data. Although such an estimate necessarily ignores the fact
that target and measurement circuitry have very different struc-
ture and topology, it provides meaningful results due to the fact
that we do not rely on single-event-upset (SEU) cross sections but
rather on SET cross sections: Whereas it is known that memory
elements like ﬂip-ﬂops are more susceptible to radiation than com-
binational logic, this is primarily a consequence of the fact that

5 This can be resolved on a statistical basis, which is one of our future aims.

6 Given that M can also tolerate many triple and even higher-order faults, this is a
very conservative assumption.

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

785

A

O1

O2
O3

Y1
Y2

Y3
Y4

Y5

Y6

Y7
Y8

Y9

X1
X2

1X3
0

X4

X5
X6

X7

X8
1X9
0

100n

120n

140n
Time (in ns)

160n

180n

Fig. 12. Spice simulation of the up/down counters.

SETs in combinational logic are relatively unlikely to be latched.
Consequently, they do not as easily lead to an SEU as SETs resulting
from a direct hit of a ﬂip-ﬂop. By contrast, the SET generation pro-
cess is the same both in combinational logic and in ﬂip-ﬂops.
Our radiation experiments for validating the 3D model provided
a (saturated) SET cross section c of about c = 5 lm2 for our 90 nm
ASIC technology, which matches the ﬁgures given in the literature
[52]. The cross section expresses that a total ﬂuence of 1 particle
per c results in 1 SET per device of interest (in our case, per tran-
sistor) on average. Trivial calculations based on expected values re-
veal that if we choose /D ¼ 1
, we get one hit in M during D on
cIM
average. Since D should be chosen large enough to fully exploit
M’s double-hit resilience, but should only rarely lead to triple hits,
we choose
D ¼ C
c/IM
for some constant 0 < C 6 2, which leads to E[HM] = C hits in M on
average. For arbitrary distributions of the number of hits HM in a
single measurement period in M, Markov’s inequality P{HM-

;

P h} 6 E[HM]/h reveals a triple-hit probability of p = P{HM P 3}
6 C/3; it can be made sufﬁciently small by choosing C sufﬁciently
small. As this results in a geometric distribution of safe measure-
ment periods, we can expect an average of PM = 1/p P 3/C consecu-
tive safe measurement periods.
On the other hand, the average number of hits in T during D is
CIT/IM, so we can expect one hit on average in T after
P ¼ IM
CIT
measurement periods; note that they eat up a total time of PD ¼ 1
.
c/IT
To see a hit in T before the measurement is affected by a triple
hit in M on average, we should have something like P 6 PM, which
6 3. This is a very conservative estimate, how-
is guaranteed if IM
IT
ever. To obtain the actual probability of failure Pfail, i.e., of an unsafe
measurement period within two consecutive target hits, we will
assume that the number of hits in M and T follow a compound
Poisson distribution with the same average hit rate per lm  s. This
implies a rate kM = C per measurement period in M, and kT = CIT/IM
in T.

ð4Þ

786

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

Z1
Z2
Z3
Z4
Z5
Z6
Z7
Z8
Z9
Z10
Z11
Z12
Z13
Z14
Z15
Z16
Z17
Z18
Z19
Z20
Z21
Z22
Z23
Z24
Z25
Z26
Z27
Z28
Z29
Z30
Z31
Z32

100n

120n

140n
Time (in ns)

160n

180n

Fig. 13. Spice simulation of the LFSR counter 1.

kP0

peC T
eC T   1 þ p :

Recalling the geometric distribution of safe measurement peri-
ods with parameter p and the fact that the probability of no target
hit within k measurement periods is e kT k ¼ e C T k , where we used
X
the abbreviation CT = CIT/IM, we ﬁnd
pð1   pÞk e C T k ¼ p
¼
P fail ¼
1   1 p
eC T
Since the Poisson distribution of HM implies p = P{HM P 3} =
1   (1 + C + C2/2)e C = 1   (1 + C0 )e C with C0 = C + C2/2, we thus
easily obtain
P fail ¼ ð1   ð1 þ C 0 Þe C ÞeC T
eC T   ð1 þ C 0 Þe C ¼ 1   ð1 þ C 0 Þe C
1   ð1 þ C 0 Þe C C T
¼ 1   ð1 þ C þ C 2
2 Þe C
Þ :
2 Þe C _ðIM þIT
1   ð1 þ C þ C 2
IM

Expression (5) for Pfail can be made as small as desired by choosing
C 2 (0, 2] sufﬁciently small, for all reasonable ratios IT/IM. For exam-
ple, for IT = IM/2, which is more than reasonable for all target circuits
except for the inverter chain according to Table 2, we obtain
Pfail < 0.01 for C = 0.2. For the inverter chain, Table 2 reveals IT = IM/
20, which yields Pfail < 0.1 for C = 0.2. Note that, according to (4),
C = 0.2 leads to P = 5 measurement periods between two target hits
on average. Given the quite conservative assumptions underlying
our probabilistic analysis, we can hence ﬁnally conclude that our
measurement architecture is indeed excellently suited for collecting
statistically meaningful long-term data.

9. Conclusions

We provided an overview of the general approach for develop-
ing meaningful digital
radiation failure models
for digital

ð5Þ

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

787

W1
W2
W3
W4
W5
W6
W7
W8
W9
W10
W11
W12
W13
W14
W15
W16
W17
W18
W19
W20
W21
W22
W23
W24
W25
W26
W27
W28
W29
W30
W31
W32

100n

120n

140n
Time (inns)

160n

180n

Fig. 14. Spice simulation of the LFSR counter 2.

asynchronous circuits in our FATAL project. We utilize a chain of
3D models and Spice models for model validation and calibration,
along with radiation experiments utilizing a speciﬁcally designed
FRad Chip that will be used for gathering radiation failure statistics
in continuous long-term experiments.
We presented our choice of target circuits and on-chip mea-
surement architecture of the FRad Chip, along with the results of
the pre-fabrication analysis using our general FATAL approach.
Key challenges are (i) distinguishing SETs from normal switching
activity of the target circuits, (ii) providing reliable SET data acqui-
sition in spite of radiation hits in the measurement infrastructure,
and (iii) leaving as much of the die area available for the target cir-
cuits as possible. Rather than employing a rad-hard design, our
architecture considers the measurement circuitry as additional tar-
get circuits, and hence allows to tolerate hits in the former by an
architectural design that supports reliable fault detection based
on a fault dictionary.

Our circuit architecture has been evaluated by means of elabo-
rate fault-injection experiments based on detailed 3D models and
Spice models of the FRad Chip, which were in turn validated and
calibrated using micro-beam radiation experiments. For the latter,
target circuits instrumented with high-speed analog-ampliﬁers
have been used for analog SET recording. Together with a probabi-
listic analysis based on experimental cross-section data, the results
of this evaluation allow us to predict that the FRad Chip will indeed
serve its purpose as an effective means for the end-to-end valida-
tion of digital failure models.
The main focus in our future work is clearly on ﬁnalizing the de-
sign of the FRad Chip and manufacturing the ASIC. In addition, our
research has also revealed the need for a reﬁned understanding of
the SET generation process and, consequently, reﬁned Spice mod-
els, which we plan to pursue further. We also plan to leverage
our combined simulation/experiment approach for studying the
dependence of (transient) SEE impact and frequency on operating

788

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

conditions like supply voltage and temperature in detail. This will
be an interesting contribution to our general FATAL high-level
modeling approach. Beyond the SET generation we are investigat-
ing SET propagation as well, and, speciﬁcally in the context of asyn-
chronous circuit structures, we have recently come up with some
encouraging ﬁndings.

References

[1] M. Függer, U. Schmid, Reconciling fault-tolerant distributed computing and
systems-on-chip, Distributed Computing 24 (6) (2012) 323–355.
[2] M. Függer, A. Dielacher, U. Schmid, How to speed-up fault-tolerant clock
generation in VLSI systems-on-chip via pipelining, in: Proceedings Eighth
European Dependable Computing Conference (EDCC’10), 2010, pp. 230–239.
[3] D. Dolev, M. Függer, C. Lenzen, U. Schmid, Fault-tolerant algorithms for tick-
generation in asynchronous logic: robust pulse generation – (extended
abstract), in: Proceedings 13th International Symposium on Stabilization,
Safety, and Security of Distributed Systems (SSS’11), LNCS 6976, Springer,
2011, pp. 163–177.
[4] B. Charron-Bost, S. Dolev,
J. Ebergen, U.S. chmid (Eds.), Fault-Tolerant
Distributed Algorithms on VLSI Chips, Schloss Dagstuhl, Germany, 2009.
[5] D.M. Chapiro, Globally-Asynchronous Locally-Synchronous Systems, Ph.D.
Thesis, Stanford University, October 1984.
[6] M.J. Fischer, N.A. Lynch, M.S. Paterson, Impossibility of distributed consensus
with one faulty process, Journal of the ACM 32 (2) (1985) 374–382.
[7] T. Verdel, Y. Makris, Duplication-based concurrent error detection in
asynchronous circuits: shortcomings and remedies, in: Proceedings 17th
IEEE International Symposium on Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI Systems
(DFT 2002), 2002, pp. 345–353.
[8] W. Jang, A.J. Martin, SEU-tolerant QDI circuits, in: Proceedings 11th Int’l
Symposium on Asynchronous Circuits and Systems (ASYNC’05), 2005, pp.
156–165.
[9] S. Peng, R. Manohar, Efﬁcient failure detection in pipelined asynchronous
circuits, in: Proceedings 20th IEEE International Symposium on Defect and
Fault Tolerance in VLSI Systems (DFT’05), 2005, pp. 484–493.
[10] W. Kuang, E. Xiao, C. Ibarra, P. Zhao, Design asynchronous circuits for soft
error tolerance, in: Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Integrated
Circuit Design and Technology (ICICDT’07), 2007, pp. 1–5.
[11] G. Fuchs, A. Steininger, VLSI implementation of a distributed algorithm for
fault-tolerant
clock generation,
Journal of Electrical and Computer
Engineering (2011).
[12] I. Koren, Z. Koren, Defect tolerance in VLSI circuits: techniques and yield
analysis, Proceedings of the IEEE 86 (9) (1998) 1819–1838.
[13] T. Karnik, P. Hazucha, J. Patel, Characterization of soft errors caused by single
event upsets in CMOS processes, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing 1 (2) (2004) 128–143.
[14] R. Baumann, Radiation-induced soft errors in advanced semiconductor
technologies, IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability 5 (3)
(2005) 305–316.
[15] E. Normand, Single-event effects in avionics, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
Science 43 (2) (1996) 461–474.
[16] C. Dyer, D. Rodgers, Effects on spacecraft & aircraft electronics,
in:
Proceedings ESA Workshop on Space Weather, ESA WPP-155, ESA,
Nordwijk, The Netherlands, 1998, pp. 17–27.
[17] J. Schwank, M. Shaneyfelt, P. Paillet, D. Beutler, V. Ferlet-Cavrois, B. Draper, R.
Loemaker, P. Dodd, F. Sexton, Optimum laboratory radiation source for
hardness assurance testing, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 48 (6)
(2001) 2152–2157.
[18] Z. Kalbarczyk, R. Iyer, G. Ries, J. Patel, M. Lee, Y. Xiao, Hierarchical simulation
approach to accurate fault modeling for system dependability evaluation,
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 25 (5) (1999) 619–632.
[19] D. Mavis, P. Eaton, SEU and SET modeling and mitigation in deep submicron
technologies,
in: Proceedings 45th Annual
IEEE International Reliability
Physics Symposium, 2007, pp. 293–305.
[20] R. Ramanarayanan, V. Degalahal, R. Krishnan, J. Kim, V. Narayanan, Y. Xie, M.J.
Irwin, K. Unlu, Modeling Soft Errors at the Device and Logic Levels for
Combinational Circuits,
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing 6 (3) (2009) 202–216.
[21] J.F. Ziegler, SRIM-2003, Nuclear instruments and methods in physics research
section b: beam interactions with materials and atoms, in: Proceedings of the
Sixteenth International Conference on Ion Beam Analysis, vols. 219–220,
2004, pp. 1027–1036.
[22] K. Schweiger, M. Hofbauer, H. Dietrich, H. Zimmermann, K.. Voss, B. Merk,
Position dependent measurement of single event transient voltage pulse
shapes under heavy ion irradiation, Electronics Letters 48 (3) (2012) 171–
172.
[23] R. Garg, S.P. Khatri, Efﬁcient analytical determination of the SEU-induced
pulse shape, in: Proceedings of the 2009 Asia and South Paciﬁc Design
Automation Conference, ASP-DAC ’09, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2009,
pp. 461–467.
[24] M. Peercy, P. Banerjee, Fault tolerant VLSI systems, Proceedings of the IEEE 81
(5) (1993) 745–758.

IEEE

IEEE Transactions on

[25] M. Nicolaidis, Design for soft error mitigation, IEEE Transactions on Device
and Materials Reliability 5 (3) (2005) 405–418.
[26] P. Shivakumar, M. Kistler, S. Keckler, D. Burger, L. Alvisi, Modeling the effect of
in:
technology trends on the soft error rate of combinational
logic,
Proceedings
International Conference on Dependable
Systems
and
Networks (DSN’02), 2002, pp. 389–398.
[27] P. Dodd, L. Massengill, Basic mechanisms and modeling of single-event upset
in digital microelectronics, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 50 (3)
(2003) 583–602.
[28] A. Dixit, A. Wood, The impact of new technology on soft error rates, in: Proc.
IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS’11), 2011, pp. 5B.4.1–
5B.4.7.
[29] R. Baumann, Soft errors in advanced semiconductor devices—Part I: The three
radiation sources, IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability 1 (1)
(2001) 17–22.
[30] M. Gordon, P. Goldhagen, K. Rodbell, T. Zabel, H. Tang, J. Clem, P. Bailey,
Measurement of the ﬂux and energy spectrum of cosmic-ray induced
neutrons on the ground, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 51 (6) (2004)
3427–3434.
[31] Y. Tosaka, S. Satoh, T. Itakura, H. Ehara, T. Ueda, G. Wofﬁnden, S. Wender,
Measurement and analysis of neutron-induced soft errors in sub-half-micron
CMOS circuits, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 45 (7) (1998) 1453–
1458.
[32] I. Lantz, Soft errors induced by alpha particles,
Reliability 45 (2) (1996) 174–179.
[33] C.J. Myers, Asynchronous Circuit Design, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001.
[34] P. Dodd, F. Sexton, Critical charge concepts for CMOS SRAMs,
Transactions on Nuclear Science 42 (6) (1995) 1764–1771.
[35] P. Dodd, M. Shaneyfelt, J. Felix, J. Schwank, Production and propagation of
single-event transients in high-speed digital logic ICs, IEEE Transactions on
Nuclear Science 51 (6) (2004) 3278–3284.
[36] T. Colladant, O. Flament, A. L’Hoir, V. Ferlet-Cavrois, C. D’Hose, J. du Port
de Potcharra, Study of transient current induced by heavy-ion in NMOS/
SOI transistors, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 49 (6) (2002) 2957–
2964.
[37] D. Kobayashi, H. Saito, K. Hirose, Estimation of single event transient voltage
pulses in VLSI circuits from heavy-ion-induced transient currents measured
in a single mosfet, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 54 (4) (2007) 1037–
1041.
[38] M.A. Bajura, Y. Boulghassoul, R. Naseer, S. Dasgupta, A.F. Witulski, J. Sondeen,
S.D. Stansberry, J. Draper, L.W. Massengill, J.N. Damoulakis, Models and
algorithmic limits for an ECC-based approach to hardening sub-100-nm
SRAMs, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 54 (4) (2007) 935–945.
[39] B. Narasimham, B. Bhuva, R. Schrimpf, L. Massengill, M. Gadlage, O. Amusan,
W. Holman, A. Witulski, W. Robinson,
J. Black,
J. Benedetto, P. Eaton,
Characterization of digital single event transient pulse-widths in 130-nm and
90-nm CMOS technologies, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 54 (6)
(2007) 2506–2511.
[40] J. Ahlbin, L. Massengill, B. Bhuva, B. Narasimham, M. Gadlage, P. Eaton, Single-
event transient pulse quenching in advanced CMOS logic circuits, IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 56 (6) (2009) 3050–3056.
[41] J. Ahlbin, T. Loveless, D. Ball, B. Bhuva, A. Witul ski, L. Massengill, M. Gadlage,
Double-pulse-single-event transients in combinational logic, in: 2011 IEEE
International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), 2011, pp. 3C.5.1–3C.5.6.
[42] R. Garg, S. Khatri, 3d simulation and analysis of the radiation tolerance of
voltage scaled digital circuit, in: Proceedings IEEE International Conference
on Computer Design (ICCD’09), 2009, pp. 498–504.
[43] M. Gadlage, J. Ahlbin, B. Narasimham, B. Bhuva, L. Ma ssengill, R. Schrimpf,
Single-event transient measurements in nMOS and pMOS transistors in a 65-
nm bulk CMOS technology at elevated temperatures, IEEE Transactions on
Device and Materials Reliability 11 (1) (2011) 179–186.
[44] N. Atkinson, J. Ahlbin, A. Witulski, N. Gaspard, W. Holman, B. Bhuva, E. Zhang,
L. Chen, L. Massengill, Effect of transistor density and charge sharing on
single-event transients in 90-nm bulk cmos, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
Science 58 (6) (2011) 2578–2584.
[45] M. Nicolaidis, R. Perez, Measuring the width of transient pulses induced by
ionising radiation, in: Proceedings 41st Annual IEEE International Reliability
Physics Symposium, 2003, pp. 56–59.
[46] M. Baze, S. Buchner, Attenuation of single event induced pulses in CMOS
combinational logic, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 44 (6) (1997)
2217–2223.
[47] P. Eaton, J. Benedetto, D. Mavis, K. Avery, M. Sibley, M. Gadlage, T. Turﬂinger,
Single event transient pulsewidth measurements using a variable temporal
latch technique, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 51 (6) (2004) 3365–
3368.
[48] J. Benedetto, P. Eaton, D. Mavis, M. Gadlage, T. Turﬂinger, Variation of digital
SET pulse widths and the implications for single event hardening of advanced
CMOS processes, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 52 (6) (2005) 2114–
2119.
[49] V. Ferlet-Cavrois, P. Paillet, D. McMorrow, A. Torres, M. Gaillardin, J. Melinger,
A. Knudson, A. Campbell, J. Schwank, G. Vizkelethy, M. Shaneyfelt, K. Hirose,
O. Faynot, C. Jahan, L. Tosti, Direct measurement of transient pulses induced
by laser and heavy ion irradiation in deca-nanometer devices,
IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 52 (6) (2005) 2104–2113.
[50] Y. Yanagawa, K. Hirose, H. Saito, D. Kobayashi, S. Fukuda, S. Ishii, D. Takahashi,
K. Yamamoto, Y. Kuroda, Direct measurement of SET pulse widths in 0.2-lm

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

789

SOI logic cells irradiated by heavy ions, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science
53 (6) (2006) 3575–3578.
[51] V. Ferlet-Cavrois, P. Paillet, D. McMorrow, N. Fel, J. Baggio, S. Girard, O.
Duhamel, J. Melinger, M. Gaillardin, J. Schwank, P. Dodd, M. Shaneyfelt, J.
Felix, New insights into single event transient propagation in chains of
invertersevidence
for
propagation-induced
pulse
broadening,
IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 54 (6) (2007) 2338–2346.
[52] B. Narasimham, M. Gadlage, B. Bhuva, R. Schrimpf, L. Massengill, W. Holman,
A. Witulski, K. Galloway, Test circuit for measuring pulse widths of single-
event transients causing soft errors,
in: Proceedings IEEE International
Conference on Microelectronic Test Structures (ICMTS’08), 2008, pp. 142–
146.
[53] A. Balasubramanian, B. Narasimham, B. Bhuva, L.W. Massengill, P. Eaton, M.
Sibley, D. Mavis, Implications of total dose on single-event transient (SET)
pulse width measurement techniques, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science
55 (6) (2008) 3336–3341.
[54] Y. Monnet, M. Renaudin, R. Leveugle, Designing resistant circuits against
malicious faults injection using asynchronous logic, IEEE Transactions on
Computers 55 (9) (2006) 1104–1115.
[55] B. Narasimham, V. Ramachandran, B.L. Bhuva, R.D. Schrimpf, A.F. Witulski,
W.T. Holman, L.W. Massengill, J.D. Black, W.H. Robinson, D. McMorrow, On-
chip
characterization
of
single-event
transient
pulsewidths,
IEEE
Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability 6 (4) (2006) 542–549.
[56] V. Ferlet-Cavrois, P. Paillet, M. Gaillardin, D. Lambert, J. Baggio, J.R. Schwank,
G. Vizkelethy, M.R. Shaneyfelt, K. Hirose, E.W. Blackmore, O. Faynot, C. Jahan,
L. Tosti, Statistical analysis of the charge collected in SOI and bulk devices
under heavy lon and proton irradiation implications for digital SETs, IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 53 (6) (2006) 3242–3252.
[57] S. Buchner, M. Baze, D. Brown, D. McMorrow, J. Melinger, Comparison of error
rates in combinational and sequential logic, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
Science 44 (6) (1997) 2209–2216.
[58] K.J. Hass, J.W. Gambles, B. Walker, M. Zampaglione, Mitigating single event
upsets from combinational logic, in: Proceedings of the 7th NASA Symposium
on VLSI Design, 1998, pp. 4.1.1–4.1.10.
[59] P. Hazucha, C. Svensson, Cosmic ray neutron multiple-upset measurements in
a 0.6-lm CMOS process, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 47 (6) (2000)
2595–2602.
[60] P. Hazucha, C. Sevenson, Optimized test circuits for ser characterization of a
manufacturing process, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 35 (2) (2000) 142–
148.
[61] M.P. Baze, J. Wert, J.W. Clement, M.G. Hubert, A. Witulski, O.A. Amusan, L.
Massengill, D. McMorrow, Propagating SET characterization technique for
digital CMOS libraries, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 53 (6) (2006)
3472–3478.
[62] G.C. Messenger, Collection of charge on junction nodes from ion tracks, IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 29 (6) (1982) 2024–2031.
[63] M.G. Buehler, R.A. Allen, An analytical method for predicting CMOS SRAM
upsets with application to asymmetrical memory cells, IEEE Transactions on
Nuclear Science 33 (6) (1986) 1637–1641.
[64] R.C. Jaeger, R.M. Fox, S.E. Diehl, Analytic expressions for the critical charge in
CMOS static RAM cells, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 30 (6) (1983)
4616–4619.
[65] G. Ries, G. Choi, R. Iyer, Device-level transient fault modeling, in: Proceedings
Twenty-Fourth International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing
(FTCS-24), 1994, pp. 86–94.
[66] K. Clark, A. Ross, H. Loomis, T. Weatherford, D. Fouts, S. Buchner, D.
McMorrow, Modeling single-event effects in a complex digital device, IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 50 (6) (2003) 2069–2080.
Clock
[67] S. Dolev,
Possible
and
Impossible
Self-Stabilizing Digital
Synchronization in General Graphs, Tech. Rep. 96–06, Department of
Mathematics and Computer Science Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva,
Israel, August 1996.
[68] S. Dolev, Y. Haviv, Self-stabilizing microprocessors,
analyzing and
overcoming soft-errors,
IEEE Transactions on Computers 55 (4) (2006)
385–399.
[69] A. Ammari, K. Hadjiat, R. Leveugle, Combined fault classiﬁcation and error
propagation analysis to reﬁne rt-level dependability evaluation, Journal of
Electronic Testing 21 (4) (2005) 365–376.
[70] H. Nguyen, Y. Yagil, N. Seifert, M. Reitsma, Chip-level soft error estimation
method, IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability 5 (3) (2005)
365–381.
[71] N. Seifert, P. Shipley, M. Pant, V. Ambrose, B. GiII, Radiation-induced clock
jitter and race, in: Proceedings 43rd Annual IEEE International Reliability
Physics Symposium, 2005, pp. 215–222.
[72] M.J. Gadlage, P.H. Eaton, J.M. Benedetto, M. Carts, V. Zhu, T.L. Turﬂinger,
Digital device error rate trends in advanced CMOS technologies,
IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 53 (6) (2006) 3466–3471.
[73] A. Maheshwari, I. Koren, W. Burleson, Accurate estimation of soft error rate
(SER) in VLSI circuits, in: Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Int. Symposium on
Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI Systems, 2004, pp. 377–385.
[74] G. Srinivasan, P. Murley, H. Tang, Accurate, predictive modeling of soft error
rate due to cosmic rays and chip alpha radiation, in: Proceedings 32nd Annual
IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium, 1994, pp. 12–16.
[75] P. Hazucha, T. Karnik, J. Maiz, S. Walstra, B. Bloechel, J. Tschanz, G. Dermer, S.
Hareland, P. Armstrong, S. Borkar, Neutron soft error rate measurements in a
90-nm CMOS process and scaling trends in SRAM from 0.25-um to 90-nm

generation, in: Technical Digest IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting
(IEDM’03), 2003, pp. 21.5.1–21.5.4.
[76] G. Gasiot, P. Roche, P. Flatresse, Comparison of multiple cell upset response of
BULK and SOI 130 nm technologies in the terrestrial environment,
in:
Proceedings IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS’08),
2008, pp. 192–194.
[77] P. Roche, G. Gasiot,
front-end and middle-end process
Impacts of
modiﬁcations on terrestrial soft error rate, IEEE Transactions on Device and
Materials Reliability 5 (3) (2005) 382–396.
[78] T. Calin, M. Nicolaidis, R. Velazco, Upset hardened memory design for
submicron CMOS technology, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 43 (6)
(1996) 2874–2878.
[79] R. Naseer, J. Draper, DF-DICE: A scalable solution for soft error tolerant circuit
design, in: Proceedings. 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and
Systems (ISCAS’06), 2006, 4pp.
[80] P. Mongkolkachit, B. Bhuva, Design technique for mitigation of alpha-
particle-induced single-event
IEEE
logic,
in combinational
transients
Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability 3 (3) (2003) 89–92.
[81] D.D. Thaker, F. Impens, I.L. Chuang, R. n Amirtharajah, F.T. Chong, Recursive
TMR: scaling fault tolerance in the nanoscale era, IEEE Design and Test 22 (4)
(2005) 298–305.
[82] C. LaFrieda, R. Manohar, Fault detection and isolation techniques for quasi
delay-insensitive circuits,
in: Proceedings International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN’04), 2004, pp. 41–50.
[83] C. Bolchini, A. Miele, M. Santambrogio, TMR and partial dynamic
reconﬁguration to mitigate SEU faults in FPGAs, in: Proceedings 22nd IEEE
International Symposium on Defect and Fault Tol erance in VLSI Systems
(DFT’07), 2007, pp. 87–95.
[84] Y. Monnet, M. Renaudin, R. Leveugle, Hardening techniques against transient
faults for asynchronous circuits, in: Proceedings 11th IEEE International On-
Line Testing Symposium (IOLTS’05), 2005, pp. 129–134.
[85] M. Nicolaidis, GRAAL: A new fault tolerant design paradigm for mitigating the
ﬂaws of deep nanometric technologies, in: IEEE International Test Conference
(ITC 2007), 2007, pp. 1–10.
[86] A. Chugg, M. Moutrie, R. Jones, Broadening of the variance of the number of
upsets in a read-cycle by MBUs, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 51 (6)
(2004) 3701–3707.
[87] A.M. Chugg, M.J. Moutrie, A.J. Burnell, R. Jones, A statistical technique to
measure the proportion of MBU’s in SEE testing, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
Science 53 (6) (2006) 3139–3144.
[88] C. Dyer, C. Comber, P. Truscott, C. Sanderson, C. Underwood, M. Oldﬁeld, A.
Campbell, S. Buchner, T. Meehan, Microdosimetry code simulation of charge-
deposition spectra, single-event upsets and multiple-bit upsets,
IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 46 (6) (1999) 1486–1493.
[89] Y. Monnet, M. Renaudin, R. Leveugle, Formal analysis of quasi delay
insensitive circuits behavior in the presence of SEUs, in: Proceedings 13th
IEEE International On-Line Testing Symposium (IOLTS’07), 2007, pp. 113–
120.
[90] J. Di, A framework on mitigating single event upset using delay-insensitive
asynchronous circuits, in: Proceedings IEEE Region 5 Technical Conference,
2007, pp. 354–357.
[91] A. Torres, J. Sauvestre, B. Fischer, P. Barberet, Charge collection measurements
on SOI capacitors using heavy ion microprobe at GSI, in: Proceedings 8th
European Conference on Radiation and Its Effects on Components and
Systems (RADECS’05), 2005, pp. PG1-1–PG1-5.
[92] S. Jahinuzzaman, M. Sharifkhani, M. Sachdev, An analytical model for soft
error critical charge of nanometric srams, IEEE Transactions on Very Large
Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 17 (9) (2009) 1187–1195.
[93] P. Roche, J. Palau, G. Bruguier, C. Tavernier, R. Ecoffet, J. Gasiot, Determination
of key parameters for SEU occurrence using 3-d full cell SRAM simulations,
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 46 (6) (1999) 1354–1362.
[94] Y. Xu, H. Puchner, A. Chatila, O. Pohland, B. Bruggeman, B. Jin, D. Radaelli, S.
Daniel, Process impact on SRAM alpha-particle SEU performance, in: 42nd
Annual 2004 IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium Proceedings,
2004, pp. 294–299.
[95] B. Zhang, A. Arapostathis, S. Nassif, M. Orshansky, Analytical modeling of
SRAM dynamic stability, in: Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design, ICCAD ’06, ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2006, pp. 315–322.
[96] E. Neto, I. Ribeiro, M. Vieira, G. Wirth, F. Kastensmidt, Using bulk built-in
current sensors to detect soft errors, IEEE Micro 26 (5) (2006) 10–18.
[97] G. Wirth, M. Vieira, F. Kastensmidt, Computer efﬁcient modeling of SRAM cell
sensitivity to SEU, in: Proceeding of IEEE Latin American Test Workshop, IEEE
CS Press, 2005, pp. 51–56.
[98] D. Muller, W. Bartky, A theory of asynchronous circuits,
Switching, Proc. Int’l Symp., 1959, pp. 204–243.
[99] M. Shams, J. Ebergen, M. Elmasry, A comparison of CMOS implementations of
an asynchronous circuits primitive: the C-element, in: Proceedings of the
1996 International Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design, ISLPED
’96, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 1996, pp. 93–96.
[100] J. Sparsø, Asynchronous circuit design - a tutorial,
in: Principles of
asynchronous circuit design – A systems Perspective, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 2001, pp. 1–152 (Chapters 1–8).
[101] R.E. Lyons, W. Vanderkulk, The use of triple-modular redundancy to improve
computer reliability, IBM Journal of Research and Development 6 (1962)
200–209.

in: Theory of

790

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

[102] F. MacWilliams, N. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes, second ed.,
North-Holland Publishing Company, 1978.
[103] D. Rennels, A. Avlzienls, M. Ercegovac, A study of standard building blocks for
the design of fault-tolerant distributed computer systems, in: 8th Annl. Intl.
Conf. on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 1978, pp. 144–149.
[104] B. Elspas, The theory of autonomous linear sequential networks,
Transactions on Circuit Theory 6 (1) (1959) 45–60.
[105] A. Ajane, P.M. Furth, E.E. Johnson, R.L. Subramanyam, Comparison of binary
and LFSR counters and efﬁcient LFSR decoding algorithm, in: 2011 IEEE 54th
International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS), 2011,
pp. 1–4.
[106] A. Ahmad, N. Nanda, K. Garg, Critical role of primitive polynomials in an LFSR
based testing technique, Electronics Letters 24 (15) (1988) 953–955.
[107] I.E. Sutherland, Micropipelines, Communications of the ACM 32 (1989) 720–
738.

IRE

Varadan Savulimedu Veeravalli is a project assistant at
the Embedded Computing Systems Group at the Vienna
University of Technology. He received his M.S. degree in
Electrical and Computer Engineering from Rutgers, The
State University of New Jersey in the year 2008 and is
currently pursuing his PhD. His main research interests
are single event effects, digital design, radiation toler-
ance, fault tolerance, and interconnection networks.

Thomas Polzer is a research assistant at the Embedded
Computing Systems Group at the Vienna University of
Technology. He received his Dipl.-Ing. degree (M.Sc.
equivalent) in 2009 and is currently pursuing his PhD.
His research interests are in the ﬁeld of metastability
analysis and measurement as well as in modeling and
analysis of radiation hits on semiconductors.

Ulrich Schmid is full professor and head of
the
Embedded Computing Systems Group at the Institut für
Technische Informatik at TU Vienna. He studied com-
puter science and mathematics and also spent several
years in industrial electronics and embedded systems
design. Ulrich Schmid authored and co-authored
numerous papers in the ﬁeld of theoretical and techni-
cal computer science and received several awards and
prices, like the Austrian START-price 1996. His current
research interests focus on the mathematical analysis of
fault-tolerant distributed algorithms and real-time
systems, with special emphasis on their application in
systems-on-chips and networked embedded systems.

Andreas Steininger is associate professor
in the
Embedded Computing Systems group at TU Vienna’s
Institute of Computer Engineering. He is an experienced
hardware designer and project leader who has been
involved in many national and international projects
concerned with the design of fault tolerant digital cir-
cuits and their evaluation by means of fault injection.
During his 10 year employment at the Electrical Engi-
neering Department he has gained experiences in ana-
log circuit design as well. Among the numerous papers
he has published in the areas of fault tolerant circuit
design and their evaluation some recent ones are con-
cerned with radiation tolerant design in the context of the FATAL project. His
current research interests further include self-healing circuits and asynchronous
design with a focus on robustness against parameter variations as well as fault
effects.

Michael Hofbauer was born in Vienna in Austria, in July
1982. He received his Dipl. Ing. degree from the Vienna
University of Technology, Austria, in 2011. Since 2005
he is with the Vienna University of Technology, Institute
of Electrodynamics, Microwave and Circuit Engineering.
Since 2011 he is a Ph.D. student of this institute. His
ﬁelds of interests are single event effects, semiconduc-
tor simulations and optoelectronics.

Kurt Schweiger was born in Vienna in Austria, in July
1982. He received his Dr. degree in February 2012 while
working at the Institute of Electrodynamics, Microwave
and Circuit Engineering (EMCE), Vienna University of
Technology, Austria. His ﬁelds of interests are analog
circuit theory and design with the focus on down-
sampling mixers as well as optical communication
systems.

Horst Dietrich received his MS and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from the Vienna University of
Technology, Austria, in 1976 and 1985, respectively. He
is currently with the Institute of Electrodynamics,
Microwave and Circuit Engineering, Vienna University
of Technology, Austria, where he is professor for mea-
surement and instrumentation. His research interests
include conception and graphical programming of
automated test systems, characterization of analog
integrated circuits and design for testability.

Kerstin Schneider-Hornstein was born in St. Pölten,
Austria, on February 15, 1975. She received the Dipl. Ing.
degree from the Vienna University of Technology, Aus-
tria, in 2000. In 2004 she received her Dr. Techn. degree
at the Vienna University of Technology, Austria. Since
2001 she is with the Vienna University of Technology,
Institute of Electrodynamics, Microwave and Circuit
Engineering, Vienna, Austria. Her major ﬁelds of interest
are optoelectronics and integrated circuit design. She is
author of the Springer book ‘Highly Sensitive Optical
Receivers’.

Horst Zimmermann, received the diploma in Physics in
1984 from the Univ. of Bayreuth, Germany, and the Dr.-
Ing. degree in the Fraunhofer Inst. for Integrated Circuits
(IIS-B), Erlangen, Germany in 1991. Then, he was an
Alexander-von-Humboldt Research-Fellow at Duke
University, Durham, N.C., working on diffusion in Si,
GaAs, and InP until 1992. In 1993, he joined the Chair for
Semiconductor Electronics at Kiel University, Germany,
where he worked on optoelectronic integration. Since
2000 he is full professor for Electronic Circuit Engi-
neering at Vienna Univ. of Technology, Austria. His main
interests are in design and characterization of analog
nanometer CMOS circuits, and optoelectronic integrated CMOS and BiCMOS cir-
cuits. He is author of the Springer books ‘Integrated Silicon Optoelectronics’ and
‘Silicon Optoelectronic Integrated Circuits’ and ‘Highly Sensitive Optical Receivers’.
He is also author and co-author of more than 300 publications. IEEE Senior Member
since 2002.

V. Savulimedu Veeravalli et al. / Microprocessors and Microsystems 37 (2013) 772–791

791

Kay-Obbe Voss received his Diploma in 2002 and his
Doctor of Natural Sciences in 2006 from the Faculty for
Physics and Astronomy of the University of Heidelberg,
Germany. Since 2006 he maintains and develops the
nuclear microprobe at the GSI Helmholtz Center for
Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt, Germany.

Michael Hajek, studied Engineering Physics in Vienna.
2002 Ph.D. in Health Physics and Nuclear Safety. 2006–
2012 Assistant Professor at the Institute of Atomic and
Subatomic Physics, Vienna University of Technology.
From 2013, External Dosimetry Specialist
in the
Department of Nuclear Safety and Security, Interna-
tional Atomic Energy Agency. International Sold State
Dosimetry Organization (ISSDO) Award 2004. Guest
scientist at accelerator centres in Germany, Japan and
Switzerland. Research interests: Colour centres, dosim-
etry, health physics, luminescence, neutron spectrome-
try, medical physics, microdosimetric modeling, non-
ionizing radiation, nuclear safety, radiation effects.

Bruno Merk received his Diploma in 2009 from the
Faculty for Physics and Astronomy of the University of
Heidelberg, Germany. Since 2010 he is a Ph.D. student at
the Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany, and
working at-the nuclear microprobe of the GSI Helm-
holtz Center for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt,
Germany.

