In Praise of Digital Design
and Computer Architecture

A R M® E d i t i o n

Harris and Harris have done a remarkable and commendable job in
creating a true textbook which clearly shows their love and passion for
teaching and educating. The students who read this book will be thankful
to Harris and Harris for many years after graduation. The writing style,
the clearness, the detailed diagrams, the flow of information, the gradual
increase in the complexity of the subjects, the great examples throughout
the chapters, the exercises at the end of the chapters, the concise yet clear
explanations, the useful real-world examples, the coverage of all aspects
of each topic—all of these things are done very well. If you are a student
using this book for your course get ready to have fun, be impressed, and
learn a great deal as well!
Mehdi Hatamian, Sr. Vice President, Broadcom

Harris and Harris have done an excellent job creating this ARM version
of their popular book, Digital Design and Computer Architecture. Retar-
geting to ARM is a challenging task, but the authors have done it success-
fully while maintaining their clear and thorough presentation style, as
well as their outstanding documentation quality. I believe this new edition
will be very much welcomed by both students and professionals.
Donald Hung, San Jose State University

Of all the textbooks I’ve reviewed and assigned in my 10 years as a pro-
fessor, Digital Design and Computer Architecture is one of only two that
is unquestionably worth buying. (The other is Computer Organization
and Design.) The writing is clear and concise; the diagrams are easy to
understand; and the CPU the authors use as a running example is com-
plex enough to be realistic, yet simple enough to be thoroughly under-
stood by my students.
Zachary Kurmas, Grand Valley State University

Digital Design and Computer Architecture brings a fresh perspective to
an old discipline. Many textbooks tend to resemble overgrown shrubs,
but Harris and Harris have managed to prune away the deadwood while
preserving the fundamentals and presenting them in a contemporary con-
text. In doing so, they offer a text that will benefit students interested in
designing solutions for tomorrow’s challenges.
Jim Frenzel, University of Idaho

Harris and Harris have a pleasant and informative writing style. Their
treatment of the material is at a good level for introducing students to com-
puter engineering with plenty of helpful diagrams. Combinational circuits,
microarchitecture, and memory systems are handled particularly well.
James Pinter-Lucke, Claremont McKenna College

Harris and Harris have written a book that is very clear and easy to
understand. The exercises are well-designed and the real-world examples
are a nice touch. The lengthy and confusing explanations often found in
similar textbooks are not seen here. It’s obvious that the authors have
devoted a great deal of time and effort to create an accessible text.
I strongly recommend Digital Design and Computer Architecture.
Peiyi Zhao, Chapman University

