                            Volume 4, Issue 6, June 2014                                  ISSN: 2277 128X 
International Journal of Advanced Research in 
  Computer Science and Software Engineering 
                                                      Research Paper 
 
                                Available online at: www.ijarcsse.com 
Evolving New CAPTCHA using cognitive ability of Human 
through Computer Architecture 
Dr. Vijay Dhaka 2 
Mrs. Geeta Gandhi 1 
Professor (Dept. Of Computer Science) 
Research Scholar 
Jaipur National University ,India 
Jaipur National Universit, India
                                           
Abstract:  As  the  computerization  and  technical  development  advances,  the  information  security  has  becom e  a  very 
critical  aspect  of  modern  computing  system.  The  users,  business  and  organization  worldwide  have  to  live  with  a 
constant  threat  from  hackers  and  attackers,  who  use  a  variety  of  techniques  and  tools  in  order  to  break  down  the 
computer system, steal information and cause havoc. 
So,  when  we  have  to  make  the  network  secured  from  machines  designed  for  malicious  attack,  we  must  have  to  be 
capable  of  distinguishing  between  a  human  being  and  a  machine  .This  task  is  performed  by  CAPTCHA  i.e. 
Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart which is a class of Human Interaction 
Proof  (HIP)  that have been able  to effectively prevent web Bots  from getting access  to  the web services.  It  is a  type of 
Challenge  Response  test  used  in  computing  as  an  attempt  to  ensure  that  the  response  is  generated  by  a  person  .The 
process  involves  one  computer  asking  a  user  to  complete  a  single  test  which  the  computer  is  able  to  generate  and 
grade.  It  has  become  a  significant  and  standard  security mechanism  to  provide Authentication which  can  be  utilized 
as a tool for defending against malicious and bot programs.  
The  objective  of  the  present  paper  is  to  focus  on  the  need  of  generating  new  CAPTCHA methods  by  evaluating  and 
analyzing  the  limitation  of  present  available  CAPTCHA  .Also,  this  paper  utilizes  the  cognitive  ability  of  human  for 
generating  CAPTCHA  to  achieve  the  goal  of  differentiating  human  and  machine  apart.  For  this  we  propose  a 
framework to generate CAPTCHA using the combination of different logic gates of Computer Architecture which will 
open new doors in the direction of web security.  
 
Keywords: Web Security, CAPTCHA, Evaluation and limitation, cognitive power of human, Computer Architecture.  
 

I.    Introduction :- 
 Nowadays,  several  web  services  use  CAPTCHA  as  a  defensive  mechanism  against  automated  web  bots[1].So,  The 
necessity  of  having  CAPTCHA  on  a  web  form  is  now  not  a  topic  of  debate  or  it  is  a  must  to  keep  the  website  up  and 
live.[2]. The web  services  and  applications  that use CAPTCHA method s  for  as HIP  include  chat  rooms,  search    engines 
,password systems, online polls, email services for account registration ,prevention of sending and receiving spam, blogs, 
messaging services, free content downloading services and detecting phishing attacks [1]. 
The  present  paper  focuses  on  the  application  areas  of  CAP -TCHA  evaluating  the  present  available  CAPTCHAs 
emphasizing  the  need  of  new  CAPTCHA  generation.  Also,  it  will  provide  a  framework  of  Computer  Architecture  to 
produce CAPTCHA test randomly on the screen. 
 

II.    Literature Review: 
CAPTCHA  was  first  introduced  in  1997  when  Anderi  Broders  devised  the  CAPTCHA  method.  In  the  same  year, 
AltaVista  website  used  this  method  to  distinguish  between  computer  programs  and  human  user  [3].The  three  major 
properties of a good CAPTCHA are that  
 

(i)  It should be easy for a human user to pass.  
(ii)  It should be easy for a tester machine to generate and grade.  
(iii)  It should be hard for a software robot to pass[4] 
So  far  we  can  categorize  the  available  CAPTCHAs  as  text -  based  CAPTCHA,  Image-based  CAPTCHA,  Audio–based 
CAPTCHA  and  Video-  based  CAPTCHA.  This  categorization  only  implies  what  is  being  presented  to  the  user  and  not 
what is being used [5].  
 

2.1)  Text-Based CAPTCHAs:- 
They  typically  relies  on  sophisticated  distortion  of  text  images  rendering  them  unrecognizable  to  the  state  of  the  art  of 
pattern  recognition  programs  but  recognizable  to  human  eyes  [6].  The  E -Z  Gimpy  CAPTCHA,  Pessimal  Print 

© 2014, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                              Page | 45 

Gandhi et al., International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 4(6), 
June - 2014, pp. 45-52 
CAPTCHA [7], the Re-CAPTCHA, Baffle Text CAPTCHA (a version of Gimpy Test)[4]are some o f the major examples 
of  present  available  CAPTCHA[5].Various  service  providers  on  the  internet  like  Pay  Pal  ,Hotmail  and  You  Tube  use 
their own versions of text based CAPTCHA on  their websites and update them with newer versions frequently [1].  
 

2.2)  Image-Based CAPTCHA: 
 They  typically  require  the  users  to  perform  an  image  recognition  task  [6].  These  CAPTCHAs  are  introduced  as  a 
substitute  of  text-based CAPTCHA[8].In  this  CAPTCHA  images  are  distorted  to  such  an  extent  that  it  has minor  effect 
on  the  recognizability  by  human  ,  but  at  the  same  time  possess  great  deal  of  difficulty  for  algorithmic  recognition[8]. 
Eventually  this  idea was  to present    a more  difficult  challenge  for  spam bots  as  image  based CAPTCHA    contain  colors 
and also have  large variety of meaningful  images  rather  than  text and words  [3].These CAPTCHAs  include  the ESP -Pix 
CAPTCHA( as the first image CAPTCHA developed by Carnegie Mellon University) [9],. Asirra (Animal Species Image 
recognition  for  restricting  access),  Multimodal  CAPTCHA,  Dynamic  Image-based  CAPTCHA  (DIBC),  Identipic 
CAPTCHA etc.  [9]. 
 

2.3) Audio-based CAPTCHA:  
These kinds of CAPTCHAs typically require users to solve speech recognition task [6].They are designed firstly because 
of disability of vision and the problems related to eyes  and so on. So, it came into existence due to the visual disability of 
human being to recognize the distorted text CAPTCHA [3].  
 

2.4) Video-based CAPTCHA:  
In video-based CAPTCHA,  three words  (tags) are provided to  the users which describe a video.  If a users  ta g belongs  to 
set of automatically generated ground truth tags than a challenge is passed [1]. 
 

III.     Result and Discussion: 
On  the  basis  of  present  study  of  different  types  of  available  CAPTCHAs,  we  conclude  that  the  present  available 
CAPTCHAs are associated with some limitations which can be summarized below:  
 

(i)  Registration to a specific website got dropped about 70% with the introduction to CAPTCHA.  
(ii)  As  text-based  CAPTCHA  typically  relies  on  sophisticated  distortion  of  text  images  it  is  sometimes  so 
complicated  as  it  takes  time  to  understand  and  type  the  words  of  CAPTCHA  image  which  makes  the  user 
annoyed. 
(iii) Some CAPTCHAs protection systems can be by passed without using OCR symbols by reusing the session Id of 
a known CAPTCHA image [10]. 
(iv)  CAPTCHAs residing on shared servers can also present a problem as a security issue of another virtual host may 
leave the CAPTCHA issuer‟s site vulnerable [10]. 
(v)  Some  CAPTCHAs  are  easily  solvable  by  the  machine  using  segmentation  as  convolution  neural  networks  were 
trained using machine learning to recognize characters in each of these experiments [11].  
(vi)  Some  projects  are  designed  to  defeat  CAPTCHA  by  machine  learning  techniques  which  make  the  present 
CAPTCHA  in  secured.  For  e.g.  Mori  et  al.  published  the  paper  in  IEEE  CVPR‟03  detailing  a  method  for 
defeating EZ Gimpy by 92% [10].  
 
So,  on  the  basis  of  the  above  evaluation,  we  can  say  that  a  good  CAPTCHA  is  one  which  intends  to  provide  the 
problem easy enough for all human to solve and prevent standard automated software for filling out a form. 
Thus,  we  can  say  that  the  present  available  CAPTCHA  requires  maintaining  a  balance  between  usability  and  security 
[12]. 
This  motivates  the  requirement  to  perform  research  in  this  area  which  is  also  helpful  to  provide  new  challenges  in  the 
direction of Artificial Intelligence. 
In  this paper we  are  going  to develop  some  of  the  designs  utilizing  cognitive  ability of human  and  then display  them on 
the screen with the help of Computer Architecture which will open new doors to Web Security.  
 

IV.    Proposed Work: 
1.1  Using Cognition to develop CAPTCHA codes:  
In  our  proposed work  first  of  all  we  are  going  to  develop  some  Surrogative  images  which  will  contain  an  alphanumeric 
code hidden  into  it. Now  the  user  is supposed  to  recognize  the alphabet or number which  is  hidden within  the code. The    
main  feature  of  these  designs  is  that  they  are  the  images  generated  utilizing  either  a  number  or  alphabet.  This  concept 
makes  the  alphanumeric  code  difficult  to  be  detached  through  machine  learning  techniques,   however  on  the  other  hand 
this  code  can  be  easily  resembled  by  the  user  as  it  requires  cognition  ability  to  identify  and  grade.  In  this  way  we  have 
utilized  the cognition ability of  human being  to generate an  innovative CAPTCHA which  can  further open new doors   to 
the direction of Web security. So, the objective of these designs is to be utilized as a CAPTCHA code so that only human 
being  can  capture  the  code  hidden  into  it  utilizing  his  cognitive  ability.Cognition  means  the  capability  to  achieve 
knowledge which makes a  human being different  from a machine. using  this cognition based  innovative CAPTCHA our 
objective is to achieve an optimum CAPTCHA solution containing feature of both usability and robustness.  
Some of these designs which are chosen as CAPTCHA code  can be shown in the table(1) below :  

© 2014, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                              Page | 46 

Gandhi et al., International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 4(6), 
June - 2014, pp. 45-52 

  

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

0 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

G 

I 

J 

K 

IMAGE 1 

IMAGE 2 

IMAGE 3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

© 2014, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                              Page | 47 

Gandhi et al., International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 4(6), 
June - 2014, pp. 45-52 

L 

M 

N 

O 

P 

Q 

R 

S 

T 

U 

V 

W 

X 

Y 

Z 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table (1) Designs of Images to be used as CAPTCHA code
 
As the Cognition concerns with a group of mental processes which  includes attention, memory and understanding which 
not  the  feature  of  a  machine  is  so  this  concept  can  be  better  utilized  to  differentiate  a  human  and  a  machine.  Now  the 
Question  is  to display  these  designed  codes  randomly on  the  screen  in  the  form of CAPT CHA. For  this  we  are  going  to 
design a database which will contain the new numerology  for random display.  The working of the proposed work can be 
summarized  in  the  flow  chart  below  in  Fig  (1)  which  will  choose  6  images  randomly  at  a  time  to  be  shown  as  Hum an 
Interaction Proof(HIP) for the user.   

© 2014, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                              Page | 48 

Gandhi et al., International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 4(6), 
June - 2014, pp. 45-52 

Fig (1): Diagram showing working of proposed work.  

 

 

1.2  Technical Implementation : 
After  developing  the  Surrogative  images  mentioned  above,  now  our  goal  is  to  produce  these  designs  randomly  on  the 
screen. For  this we  will  use  some  of  the  Integrated  circuits, Combinational Circuits  and Sequential  circuits of Computer 
Architecture to achieve the mentioned goal.  
Proceeding  in  this  direction  we  first  explain  the  working  of  each  of  the  component  of  Computer  Architecture  whi ch  we 
are going to use in our circuitry and then explain the design and working of the proposed circuit.  
 

1.2.1 
: Elements of the proposed Circuit : 
(i)  The N:1 Multiplexer :  
A multiplexer is a digital circuit where  the output depends on the current  input provided  .This is a type of combinational 
circuit  where  to  select  one  of  2n  inputs  we  only  need  n  lines  to  “select  “the  input.  The  basic  block  diagram  of  N:  1 
Multiplexer is shown in Fig. (2) 

Fig (2) N: 1 Multiplexer 
 

 

(ii)  D Flip Flop :- 
The  D  flip  flop  is  one  of  the  synchronous  type  of  storage  element  utilized  for  sequential  logic.  It  employs  signals  that 
affect the storage element employed in clocked Sequential ci rcuit. 
The D flip-flop is designed utilizing the SR flip flop by inserting an Inverter between S and R assigning the  symbol D to 
the single Input. The D input is sampled during the occurrence of a clock transition from 0 to 1.  
If D=1, the output of the flip flop goes to state 1  
If D = 0, the output of the Flip flop goes to the 0 state.  
The graphic symbol and characteristic table of the D flip flop are shown in Fig (3): 

(a) Graphic symbol 

Fig (3) D-Flip flop 
 

 

D 
0 

1 

Q(t + 1) 
0        clear to 0 

1        set to 1 

© 2014, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                              Page | 49 

Gandhi et al., International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 4(6), 
June - 2014, pp. 45-52 

(b) Characteristic table 
From  this characteristic  table we  note  that  the next state Q  (t+1)  is determined  from  the D  input. The  relationship can be 
expressed by a characteristic equation   

Q (t+1) = D 
This  means  that  the  Q  output  of  the  flip  flop  receive  its  value  from  the  D  input  every  time  that  the  clock  signal  goes 
through a transition from 0 to 1. 
 

1.2.2 
: Working of the designed circuitry: 
After the description of the elementary components to be   utilized, in this section we will explain the architectural design  
of the goal to be achieved. 
For this we will first create 16 images of each of the alphanumeric code to be displayed. For instance   
16 images of Numeric 0 
16 images of numeric 1  
: 
: 
: 
: 
16 images of numeric 9;  
16 images containing letter „a‟ 
16 images containing letter ‟b‟; 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
16 images containing letter‟z‟ 
Now, as a whole we have 36alphanumeric codes (0 to 9, a to z) each having 16 images .So, the total number of images 
will be 36*16= 576.Further, we use 36 number of 16 is to 1 Multiplexer as shown in fig (4)  
(4) Block diagram of 16:1 Multiplexer  

 
Each  holding  the  image      of  a  specific  alphabet  or  number.  For  example  for  Numeric  „1‟we  use  16  images  hiding  1  as 
input to the 16 is to 1 Multiplexer as shown below in fig(5).  

 
Fig (5): Block diagram of 16: 1 multiplexer containing designs for numeric1.  
Similarly, we can show the Multiplexers designed to input alphabets „a‟, „b‟, etc as shown below in fig (6) 

 
.
Fig (6): Block diagram of 16:1 multiplexer containing designs for alphabet „a‟.  

© 2014, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                              Page | 50 

Gandhi et al., International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 4(6), 
June - 2014, pp. 45-52 

Proceeding in the same manner we have 36 such Multiplexers totally aligned as shown in fig (7)  

 

Fig (7): Architecture for random display of CAPTCHA 
 
Now our goal is to choose 6 digits at a time from these Multiplexers.  
For this, we make a set of four 16 is to 1 Multiplexer to be associated with one 4 is to 1 Multiplexer then taking next two 
16 is to 1 Multiplexers joined with one 2 is to 1 Multiplexer as in fig(7) . 
By again binding both of the outputs with one 2 is to 1 Multiplexer as shown in our circuitry.  
This complete combination will provide a single image randomly selected to be displayed on the screen.  
Now, as we have to generate 6 images to be displayed at a time, we require 6 sets of the above mentioned combination.  
Again,  to  store  these  codes  for  a  single  clock  pulse  we  will  use  6  D  Flip  flops  available  with  a  common  synchronized 
clock. This common clock input triggers all the Flip  flops on the rising edge of each pulse and the data available at the 6 
inputs  are  transferred  into  the  6  bit  register.  These  6  outputs  then  can  be  sampled  at  any  time  to  display  the  generated 
CAPTCHA.The  advantage  of  using D  flip  flop  register here  is  that  the  clear  input  goes  to  a  special  terminal  in  each  flip 
flop and when  this  input goes  to 0 all  flip  flops are  reset asynchronously which makes  the  selected pattern  to show  for  a 
small span of time . This time variant technique strengthens our CAPTCHA by reducing the chances of machine hit.    
The implementation of our work will follow the steps below:  

© 2014, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                              Page | 51 

Gandhi et al., International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 4(6), 
June - 2014, pp. 45-52 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 

Create design / patterns using alphanumeric codes. 
Generate the database  
Randomly choose the pattern with the combination of multiplexers. 
Display the pattern through combination of D flips flop.  
Obtain the user input 
Compare and evaluated the CAPTCHA entered by the user.  
Permit or deny the access to the user according to the result.  
 

(2) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

V.   Conclusion: 
The proposed work suggests a new  technique  to display CAPTCHA on  the  screen which can open new doors  to  the web 
security  which  has  become  a  critical  aspect  now  days.  Also  it  will  provide  new  challenges  to  the  field  of  Artificial 
Intelligence. 
 
References : 
(1) 
M TriqBanday  , N.A. Shah  ,” A Study of CAPTCHAs for  securing web services”, in processing of Its D&A, vol 
1, No.2 , Dec 2009. 
MuktaRao,  Nipur  Singh  ,”Random  Handwritten  CAPTCHA:  web  security  with  Difference  and  proceeding  of 
I.J.Information  Technology  and  computer  science”,2012,9,53-58  Published  online  Aug  2012  in  MECS  DOI  : 
10,5815|ifitcs.2012.09.07 
A.Krishnashanthi  ,  Dr.K.  Kuppusamy“Evolving  New  CAPTCHA  using  LCG  Algorithm  and  Unpredictable 
Algorithm”  IJERA ISSN: 2248-9622 www.ijera.com Vol. 2, Issue 3, May-Jun 2012, pp.2258-2262 
Baljit Singh Saini , AnjuBala ,”A review of Bot protection using CAPTCHA for web security ” , IOSR Journal of 
computer Engineering (IOSP-JCE) , e-ISSn:2278-0661,p-ISSN:2278-8727 vol 8, Issue 6,,pp36-42 
IVO  Kund  ,”Non-Standard  CAPTCHAs  for  web  :  A Motion  based  character  Recognition  HIP”,  a  Dissertation 
University  of Monchester.  Jeff  Yan  ,  Ahmad  Salah  EI  Ahmed  “Usability  of  CAPTCHAs  or  Usability  issues  in 
CAPTCHA design” school of computing Science, Newcastle University ,UK.  
AolityaReg,  Ashishjaim  ,Tusharpahwa  and  Abhimanyujain“Picture  CAPTCHAswith  sequencing  :  Their  types 
and Analysis”IJDS ,vol 1, issue 3,Sempmber 2010.  
R.vena  , M.RajashkaraBabu,ch.Pradeep Reddy  ,  and  T.Sunil Kumar Reddy  “Exploiting  human  – Machine Gap 
in  image  Recognition  for  Designing  CAPTCHAs  using  Multicare”  IJRRSTC,vol2  ,  No.2,June  2012,  ISSN  : 
2046-6412 
Rizwan  Ur  Rahm  “SURVEY  ON  CAPTCHA  SYSTEMS’  Journal  of  Global  Research  in  Computer  Science 
Volume 3, No. 6, June 2012. 
“Specific Implementation of Re-CAPTCHA” from Wikipedia. 
Kumar  Chellapilla,  Kevin  Larson,  Patrice  Simard,  Mary  Czerwinski  “Computers  beat  Humans  at  Single 
Character Recognition in Reading based Human Interaction Proofs (HIPs)” MicrosoftResearch,Redmond, WA 
98053. 
GRAIG  SAUER,  JONATHAN  HOLMAN,  JONATHAN  LAZAR,  HARRY  HOCHHEISER,  AND  JINJUAN 
FENG  “Accessible  Privacy  and  Security:  A  Universa lly  Usable  Human-Interaction  Proof  Tool”  Towson 
University 
USA

(9) 
(10) 

(11) 

. 

© 2014, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                              Page | 52 

