International Journal of Future Generation Communication and Networking 
Vol. 5, No. 2, June, 2012 
 
 

Database Management System as a Cloud Service   

 
 

Yvette E. Gelogo1 and Sunguk Lee2* 
1Society of Science and Engineering Research Support, 
Korea   
vette_mis@yahoo.com 
2Research Institute of Industrial Science and Technology 
Pohang, Gyeongbuk, Korea   
sunguk@rist.re.kr 
*Correspondent Author: Sunguk Lee* (sunguk@rist.re.kr) 

Abstract 

A  Cloud  database  management  system  is  a  distributed  database  that  delivers 
computing  as  a  service  instead  of  a  product.  It  is  the  sharing  of  resources,  software,  and 
information  between  multiple  devices  over  a  network  which  is  mostly  the  internet.  It  is 
expected  that  this  number  will  grow  significantly  in  the  future.  As  a  result,  there  is  a 
growing  interest  in  outsourcing  database  management  tasks  to  third  parties  that  can 
provide  these  tasks  for  much  lower  cost  due  to  the  economy  of  scale  just  like  putting  it 
into  the cloud.  In  this  paper, we  discuss  the  recent  trend  in  database management  system 
and  the  possibilities  of  making  it  as  one  of  the  services  offered  in  the  cloud.  We  also 
proposed an architecture of database management system in the cloud. 
 
Keywords: DBMS, Database Management System, Cloud computing 
 
1.  Introduction 

In  recent  years,  database  outsourcing  has  become  an  important  component  of  cloud 
computing.  Due  to  the  rapid  advancements  in  a  network  technology,  the  cost  of 
transmitting  a  terabyte  of  data  over  long  distances  has  decreased  significantly  in  the  past 
decade.  In addition,  the  total cost of data management  is  five  to  ten  times higher  than  the 
initial  acquisition  cost.  As  a  result,  there  is  a  growing  interest  in  outsourcing  database 
management  tasks  to  third parties  that can provide  these  tasks  for much  lower cost due to 
the  economy  of  scale.  This  new  outsourcing  model  has  the  benefits  of  reducing  the  cost 
for  running Database Management  System  (DBMS)  independently  [1]. Cloud  computing 
economics leveraging the power of multi-tenancy delivers extremely fast shared storage at 
a dramatically  reduced cost. Virtualization  then compounds  these advantages by enabling 
users to scale elastically and  to pay only for  the resources they use. The cost/performance 
advantages have decisively shifted in favor of the shared-disk DBMS. It is just a matter of 
time before the shared-disk DBMS establishes dominance in the cloud. 
A Cloud database management system (CDBMS) is a distributed database that delivers 
computing  as  a  service  instead  of  a  product.  It  is  the  sharing  of  resources,  software,  and 
information  between  multiply  devices  over  a  network  which  is  mostly  the  internet.  It  is 
expected  that  this  number  will  grow  significantly  in  the  future.  An  example  of  this  is 
Software  as  a  Service,  or  SaaS,  which  is  an  application  that  is  delivered  through  the 
browser  to  customers.  Cloud  applications  connect  to  a  database  that  is  being  run  on  the 
cloud  and  have  varying  degrees  of  efficiency.  Some  are  manually  configured,  some  are 
preconfigured,  and  some  are  native.  Native  cloud  databases  are  traditionally  be tter 
equipped and more stable that those that are modified to adapt to the cloud. 
 

 

 

 

71 

International Journal of Future Generation Communication and Networking 
Vol. 5, No. 2, June, 2012 
 
 
 
2. Background 
 
2.1 Database Management System (DBMS) 

A  database  management  system  (DBMS)  is  a  software  package  with  computer 
programs  that  control  the  creation,  maintenance,  and  use  of  a  database.  It  allows 
organizations  to  conveniently  develop  databases  for  various  applications  by  database 
administrators (DBAs) and other specialists. A database is an integrated collection of data 
records,  files,  and  other  objects.  A  DBMS  allows  different  user  application  programs  to 
concurrently  access  the  same  database.  DBMSs  may  use  a  variety  of  database  models, 
such  as  the  relational  model  or  object  model,  to  conveniently  describe  and  support 
applications.  It  typically  supports  query  languages,  which  are  in  fact  high -level 
programming  languages,  dedicated  database  languages  that  considerably  simplify writing 
database application programs. 
 
2.2 Cloud Characteristics 

One  of  the  oft-cited  advantages  of  cloud  computing  is  its  elasticity  in  the  face  of 
changing  conditions.  For  example,  during  seasonal  or  unexpected  spikes  in  demand  for a 
product retailed by an e-commerce company, or during an exponential growth phase for a 
social networking Website, additional computational resources can be allocated on  the fly 
to  handle  the  increased  demand  in mere minutes  (instead  of  the many  days  it  can  take  to 
procure the space and capital equipment needed to expand the computational resources in-
house).  Similarly,  in  this  environment,  one  only  pays  for  what  one  needs,  so  increased 
resources  can  be  obtained  to  handle  spikes  in  load  and  then  released  once  the  spike  has 
subsided. However, getting additional computational resources is not as simple as a magic 
upgrade  to  a  bigger,  more  powerful  machine  on  the  fly;  rather,  the  additional  resources 
are  typically  obtained  by  allocating  additional  server  instances  to  a  task  [3].  Having 
DBMS in the cloud will give advantage in fast and elastic computing.   
 
3. DBMS as a Cloud Service 

Most DBMS or database management systems are simply software packages that users 
can  acquire  to  create,  maintain  or  use  a  database.  However,  since  the  introduction  of 
cloud  computing,  DBMS  has  morphed  into  an  entirely  new  type  of  service  with  its  own 
unique  benefits  and  task  specific  advantages.   For  one  thing,  any  type  of  cloud  service 
model will  have  to  employ  a  dedicated  cloud DBMS  in  order  to  truly  provide  customers 
with excellent access to data and databases.  Traditional DBMS’s are simply not set up or 
equipped  to  deal  with  the  demands  of  cloud  computing.  And  of  course,  if  DBMS  was 
deployed as  a  service as part of  a  larger  package  provided,  it would  likely  be much more 
efficient in its duties and therefore cheaper in the long run. 
The  concept  of  the  DBMS  has  been  around  since  the  beginning  of  commercial 
computing; such as the navigational DBMS of the1960’s.  Database management systems 
are  one  of  the  oldest  integral  components  of  computing,  essentially making  it  possible  to 
scan, retrieve and organize data on hard drives and networks.  All DBMS, despite whether 
traditional  or  cloud-based,  are  essentially  communicators  that  function  as  middlemen 
between the operating system and the database. 
How  is  a  cloud DBMS different  a  traditional  one?  For  one  thing,  cloud-based DBMS 
are extremely scalable.  They are able to handle volumes of data and processes that would 
exhaust  a  typical  DBMS. Despite  their  scalability  however,  cloud  DBMS  are  still 
somewhat lacking in their ability to scale up to extremely large processes; this is expected 
to  be  remedied  in  the  coming  months  and  years  however.  Currently,  the  use  of  cloud 
DBMS’s  are  principally  used  in  the  testing  and  development  of  new  cloud  applications 
and  processes.  But  while  a  stand-alone  DBMS  can  be  used  on  a  cloud  infrastructure; 

72 

 

International Journal of Future Generation Communication and Networking 
Vol. 5, No. 2, June, 2012 
 
 
most  are  not  designed  to  take  full  advantage  of  cloud  resources.  DBMS  as  a  cloud 
service-type models seek  to capitalize on  the disparity between antiquated DBMS models 
and their lack of full cloud functionality. 
Cloud DBMS may utilize all of  these components or may have devised new strategies 
that  combine  one  or  more  elements  (like  combining  data  structures  and  the  data  query 
language,  for  example).  Many  organizations  are  exploring  the  option  of  utilizing  pre-
existing  modeling  languages  as  a  basis  for  expansion  in  a  cloud  model.   This  strategy 
ultimately  saves  on  the  time  spent  developing  cloud  DBMS’s  as  well  as  enhances  their 
overall  effectiveness,  since  traditional  modeling  languages  are  more  than  adequate  for 
handling data. 
Despite  the  benefits  offered  by  cloud-based  DBMS,  many  people  still  have 
apprehensions about them.  This is most likely due to the various security issues that have 
yet  to  be  dealt with.  These  security  issues  stem  from  the  fact  that  cloud DBMS  are  hard 
to monitor since  they often span across multiple hardware stacks and/or servers.   Security 
becomes  a  serious  issue  with  cloud  DBMS  when  there’s  multiple  Virtual  Machines 
(which might be accessing databases via any number of applications) that might be able to 
access a database without being noticed or setting off any alerts.  In this type of situation a 
malicious  person  could  potentially  access  pertinent  data  or  cause  serious  harm  to  the 
integral structure of a database, putting the entire system in jeopardy. 
There is however a proposed method for dealing with these types of incongruence.  An 
obvious  solution  is  the  deployment  of  an  autonomous  network  agent,  which  rigorously 
monitor  and  defends  all  activities  related  to  database  access.   The  limitation  of  this 
method  however,  is  that  a  network  agent  may  be  unable  to  handle  extremely  large  and 
dense volumes of activity / traffic. 
Arguably,  the  best  solution  for  dealing  with  security  issues  is  to  employ  continuous 
database  auditing.  This  involves  setting  up  a  system  that  meticulously  records,  analyze 
and  report  on  all  activities  regarding  database  access,  especially  suspicious  database 
access.   All  information  regarding  these  activities  is  logged  and  stored  in  an  extremely 
remote  and  secure  location with  alerts  being  sent  out  to  cloud management  (or  including 
any other  individuals they might have designated  to receive  this information)  in the event 
of  a  breach.  This will provide  those  in charge  of  security with  the  information  necessary 
to  determine  who  is  responsible,  where  they  are  located  as  well  as  the  specifics  of  their 
machine / hardware. 
While  deployment  of  a  dedicated  and  thorough  cloud DBMS  hasn’t  occurred  yet,  it  is 
certainly  under  development.  The  emergence  of  a  comprehensive  solution  for  all  cloud 
service models  regarding  database management will  open  the  door  to  a  new  era  of  cloud 
computing. 
Many  of  these  cloud  databases  are  designed  to  run  on  a  cluster  of  hundreds  to 
thousands of nodes, and are capable of serving data ranging from hundreds of terabytes to 
petabytes.  Compared  with  traditional  relational  database  servers,  such  cloud  databases 
may  offer  less  querying  capability  and  often  weaker  consistency  guarantees,  but  scale 
much better by providing built-in support on availability, elasticity, and load balancing. 
On  the  other  hand,  data  management  tools  are  an  important   part  of  relational  and 
analytical  data  management  business  since  business  analysts  are  often  not  technically 
advanced  and  do  not  feel  comfortable  interfacing  with  low-level  database  software 
directly.  These  tools  typically  interface  with  the  database  using  ODBC  or  JDBC,  so 
database software that want to work these products must accept SQL queries. Therefore, a 
novel  technology  to  combine  DBMS  capability  with  Cloud  scale  scalability  is  highly 
desirable. 
 

 

73 

International Journal of Future Generation Communication and Networking 
Vol. 5, No. 2, June, 2012 
 
 
 
4. Why DBMS in Cloud? 

Database Management Systems  as  a  cloud  service are  engineered  to  run  as  a  scalable, 
elastic  service  available  on  a  cloud  infrastructure.  These  DBMS  are  available  only  as  a 
cloud  offering  and  are  not  necessarily  relational.  For  example, Microsoft’s  SQL Azure  is 
fully  relational  DBMS,  while  Microsoft’s  SQL  services,  Amazon’s  simpleDB  and 
Google’s Big Table are not  relational and have different persistence models.  Cloud-based 
DBMS  services  are  provided  in  a  multi-tenancy  environment  with  elastic  resources 
allocation,  for  use  in  simple  to  complex  transactions. DBMS  as  a  cloud  service  excludes 
those DBMS  that will run on  the cloud  infrastructure, but are not  purpose-built as a cloud 
service.  Most  of  the  currently  available  DBMS  engines  will  run  on  cloud  infrastructure, 
but  are  not  specifically  engineered  to  take  advantage  of  the  cloud.  This  differentiation  is 
the  reason  for  the  change  in  name  from  “DBMS  in  the  Cloud”  to  “DBMS  as  a  cloud 
Service”; running on cloud infrastructure does not define a DBMS as a cloud service [2]. 
All  currently  available  cloud  DBMS  are  relatively  new.  SQL  azure,  the  only  fully 
relational  DBMS  available,  began  full  production  at  the  beginning  of  2012  and  still  has 
some size limitations; Microsoft plans to reduce, and eventually lift, these restrictions. 
Today,  DBMS  as  a  cloud  service  are  used  primarily  for  development  and  testing  of 
applications-  where  database  sizes  are  small  and  issues  of  security  and  collocation  with 
multiple users are not concern. One big advantages of cloud DBMS  is  their elasticity:  the 
more you use, the more you pay; the less you use, the less you pay [2]. 
Initially,  cloud  DBMSs  will  have  an  impact  for  vendors  desiring  a  less  expensive 
platform  for development. As  cloud  infrastructure with DBMSs gains maturity  especially 
in  scalability,  reliability  and  security,  cloud  implementations  used  for  short-term  projects 
such  as  small  departmental  applications  and  rapid  development  platforms  will  show 
marked  cost  reductions  compared  with  implementations  within  the  IT  department.  This 
advantages reinforced by the ability to set up a cloud DBMS environment without the use 
of  expensive  IT  personnel.  The  speed  of  setup  will  be  a  primary  driver  to  rapid 
deployment  of  systems  without  the  usual  requirements  and  planning  necessary  for  IT 
projects within the IT department. This will also reduce  the necessity for IT  to respond  to 
short  notice  and  short  duration  projects,  reducing  overall  costs  in  IT.  Data  management 
applications  are  potential  candidates  for  deployment  in  the  cloud.  This  is  because  an  on 
premises  enterprise  database  system  typically  comes  with  a  large,  sometimes  prohibitive 
up-front cost, both in hardware and in software. For many companies (especially for start-
ups  and  medium-sized  businesses),  the  pay  as-  you-go  cloud  computing  model,  along 
with  having  someone  else  worrying  about  maintaining  the  hardware,   is  very  attractive. 
Due  to  the  ever-increasing  need  for  more  analysis  over  more  data  in  today’s  corporate 
world,  along  with  an  architectural  match  in  currently  available  deployment  options,  we 
conclude  that  read-mostly  analytical  data  management  applications  are  better  suited  for 
deployment in the cloud than transactional data management applications. We thus outline 
a  research  agenda  for  large  scale  data  analysis  in  the  cloud,  showing  why  currently 
available  systems  are  not  ideally-suited  for  cloud  deployment,  and  arguing  that  there  is  a 
need for a newly designed DBMS, architected specifically for cloud computing platforms  
[3]. 
 
 

 

74 

 

International Journal of Future Generation Communication and Networking 
Vol. 5, No. 2, June, 2012 
 
 

5. DBMS in Cloud Architecture 
 

 

Figure 1. DBMS in the Cloud Architecture 
 
Above  is  a  proposed DBMS  in Cloud Architecture,  first  layer  is  the  storage,  followed 
by databases and the upper  layer is application layer.  In  terms of performance,  it provides 
efficient  data  access  with  a  better  distribution  of  values  for  some  data.  Stores  frequently 
used  SQL  statements  in memory,  avoiding  the  need  for  time -consuming  recompilation  at 
run-time.  Produces  a  detailed  report  on  each  step  used  for  data  access,  allowing  you  to 
accurately  implement  performance  enhancements.  Data  is  encrypted  when  stored  or 
backed up, without any need for programming to encrypt and decrypt.   
 
6. Conclusion 

Database Management Systems  as  a  cloud  service are  engineered  to  run  as  a  scalable, 
elastic  service available  on  a  cloud  infrastructure. Cloud DBMSs will  have  an  impact  for 
vendors  desiring  a  less  expensive  platform  for  development.  In  this  paper,  we  presented 
the  idea  of  DBMS  in  the  cloud,  the  possibilities  to  be  offered  as  one  of  the  services 
offered by promising capability of cloud computing, that is to be a DBMS as a Service.  In 
this paper we proposed an architecture of DBMS in the cloud.   
 
References 
 
[1]  Buyya  R,  Broberg  J  and  Goscinski  A,  “Cloud  computing  Principles  and  Paradigms”,  A  Jon  Wiley  & 
Sons, Inc. Publication, (2011). 
[2]  Feinberg D, “DBMS as a Cloud Service”, (2010), Gartner, Inc. and/or its Affiliates. 
[3]  Abadi  D,  “Data  Management  in  the  Cloud:  Limitations  and  Opportunities”,  Bulletin  of  the  IEEE 
Computer Society Technical Committee on Data Engineering, (2009). 
[4]  Kellogg  D,  “DBMS  in  the  Cloud:  Amazon  SimpleDB”,  http://kellblog.com/2007/12/18/dbms-in-the-
cloud-amazon-simpledb/. 

 

75 

International Journal of Future Generation Communication and Networking 
Vol. 5, No. 2, June, 2012 
 
 
 
[5]  Gravelle 
the 
to 
“Should  You  Move  Your  MySQL  Database 
R, 
http://www.databasejournal.com/features/mssql/should-you-move-your-mysql-database-to-the-
cloud.html. 
[6]  Hsieh  M,  Chang  C,  Ho  L,  Wu  J  and  Liu  P,  “SQLMR:  A  Scalable  Database  Management  System  for 
Cloud Computing”, In Proceedings of ICPP, (2011), pp. 315-324. 
[7]  Hogan M, “Database Virtualization and the Cloud”, ScaleDB Inc., (2009). 
 

Cloud?”, 

 

76 

 

