Expert system for data migration between different database 
management systems 
 
BOGDAN WALEK, CYRIL KLIMEŠ 
Department of Informatics and Computers 
University of Ostrava 
30. dubna 22, 701 03 Ostrava 
CZECH REPUBLIC 
bogdan.walek@osu.cz, cyril.klimes@osu.cz   

http://www.osu.cz 

 
 
Abstract:  This  paper deals with the  design  of  the  fuzzy  expert  system  for  processing  data  migration  between 
different relational database management systems (RDBMS).  At the beginning we identify current state of data 
migration between different RDBMS. Then we propose new approach which suggests creating of expert system 
as a tool for migration of database tables and their data between different RDBMS. The expert system contains 
a  knowledge  base which  is  composed  of  IF-THEN  rules  and  based  on  the  input  data  suggests  appropriate  data 
types  of  columns  of  database  tables.  The  proposed  tool,  which  contains  an  expert  system,  also  includes  the 
possibility  of  optimizing  the  data  types  in  the  target  RDBMS  database  tables  based  on  processed  data  of  the 
source  RDBMS  database  tables.  Paper  also  proposes  methodological  guidelines  for  successful  migration  of 
database tables and their data between different RDBMS and suggests the possibility of tool extension when the 
source  or  target  RDMBS  is  changed.    The  proposed  expert  system  is  shown  on  data  migration  of  selected 
database of the source RDBMS to the target RDBMS. 
 
 
Key-Words:  expert  system,  fuzzy,  data  migration,  database,  relational  database,  data  type,  relational  database 
management system. 
 
1  Introduction 
Actually, the concept of data migration is mentioned 
very  often.  Data  migration  is  the  process  of 
transferring  data  between  various  computer  or 
informations systems, formats and storage  types [1]. 
We  can  apply  this  concept  to  all  areas  where  we 
work  with  data,  such  as  information  systems,  file 
systems,  storage  types,  databases,  etc.  There  are 
many  reasons  for  data migration,  the most  common 
include the following: 
1.  Upgrading to a newer software or hardware 
2.  Change of company policy 
3.  Investment to IT services 
4.  Saving measures 
5.  Integration  of  multiple  data  sources  into 
one system 
In  the  area  of  relational  databases  [2]  we  can 
provide data migration of databases between various 
types of relational database management systems, in 
which  databases  are  implemented  (further  in  text 
referred  as  RDBMS).  Data  migration  can  be  also 
provided  to another version of  the  same RDBMS,  if 
we  need  to  upgrade  this  RDBMS.  During  the 
process  of  data  migration  is  important  to  provide 
correct migration of the logical structure of database 
and  data migration  of  data  stored  in  database  tables 

with  the  appropriate  data  types.  We  also  need  to 
remember  that  various  types  of  RDBMS  have 
different properties and characteristics. All RDBMS 
are  based  on  the  relational  model  [2],  [3],  but  the 
specific  properties  and  parts  of  databases  can  be 
implemented  differently.  Differences  may  be  in 
naming  and  support  of  data  types,  SQL  commands 
for  creating  and  editing  database  tables  or  the 
specific  features  of  the  RDBMS,  which may  not  be 
supported in another RDBMS. 
 
 
2  Problem Formulation 
For  clarification  of  terms  we  present  definition  of 
general  process  for  data  migration  in  the  area  of 
database, which will be used further in text. 
The general process of data migration, which is used 
between 
migration and data 
for 
database 
is 
of RDBMS, 
different types 
called ETL (Extract, transform 
and 
and 
consists of these steps: 
1.  Extracting data from the source database. 
2.  Transforming data 
into usable form for 
migration to the target database. 
3.  Migration of data to the target database. 

load) 

 

Advances in Data Networks, Communications, Computers and MaterialsISBN: 978-1-61804-118-0167terms source 
process uses the 
The ETL 
and target databases that are refine there: 
Source  database  –  database  of  source  RDBMS, 
from which data are migrated. 
Target  database  –  database  of  target  RDBMS,  into 
which data are migrated. 
As  we  mentioned  in  the  introduction,  one  of  the 
main  differences  between  different 
types  of 
RDBMS  is  the  naming  and  definition  of  data  types, 
which  are  supported  in  specific  RDBMS.  For 
illustration,  here  is  an  example  of  selected  RDBMS 
and  their  data  types,  which  are  correspond  to 
standard data type CHARACTER LARGE OBJECT 
of SQL3 standard [4] for storing long texts: 
1.  MySQL - MEDIUMTEXT, TEXT, 
LONGTEXT, BLOB, LONGBLOB 
2.  Oracle - LONG, BLOB, CLOB, NCLOB 
3.  PostgreSQL - TEXT 
4.  MSSQL - TEXT, NTEXT, 
LONGVARCHAR 
From  this example we can conclude that the naming 
of  data  types  and  their  support  in  various  types  of 
RDBMS are very different. Currently  there are a  lot 
of  tools  for  data migration between  various  types of 
RDBMS. Here are some of them:  
1.  SwisSQL Data Migration Tool 
2.  ESF Database  Migration Toolkit 
3.  DatabaseBridge 
4.  Cross-Database Studio 
5.  Data Management Center 
From  the  analysis  of  these  tools  we  have  identified 
problems and disadvantages of them: 
1.  Some tools have problems with migration of 
foreign  keys,  which  are  part  of  relations 
between  database  tables.  It  can  be  a  big 
problem,  because  inability  of  foreign  keys 
migration  is  the  reason  to  possible  data 
consistency  problem 
the  database. 
in 
Therefore, 
the  database  specialist  must 
create foreign keys manually. 
2.  There 
is  no  possibility 
to  changing 
parameters  or  properties  of  the  resulting 
physical model of the target database during 
the  process  of  data  migration.  Process  of 
data  migration  is  invariant,  so  the  database 
specialist  can´t  change  data  types  in  the 
target  database  or  optimize  logical  structure 
of the target database. 
3.  Tools  can´t  be  modified  or  extended  –  this 
is  caused  by  commercial  character  of  these 
tools,  but  it would  be  appropriate  to modify 
or  expand  of  the  tool  for  using with  another 
types of RDBMS and their new versions. 

 
 

3  Problem Solution 
For 
the  previous 
in 
reasons  presented 
the 
paragraphs, the main goal of the article is to propose 
a  tool,  which  will  reduce  or  solve  the  problems  or 
disadvantages  of 
the  current 
tools 
for  data 
migration.  The  proposed  tool  contains  the  expert 
system  for  decision  support  during  the  process  of 
data  migration  between  various  types  of  RDBMS. 
An  expert  system  proposes  and  evaluates  suitable 
data  types  for  attributes  of  database  tables  of  the 
target database, implemented in target RDBMS. The 
user  then  selects  final  data  type, which will  be  used 
to construct a physical model of  the  target database. 
An  expert  system  also  contains  knowledge  base  of 
IF-THEN  rules,  which  is  used  for  evaluating  of  the 
proposed  data  types.  The  process  to  evaluate  the 
suitability  of  the  selected  data  type  using  the 
proposed  expert  system  is  shown  in  the  following 
figure: 

 

Fig. 1 Scheme of the proposed expert system 

From  the  figure  we  can  conclude  the  input  and 
output  linguistic  variables,  which  are  the  basis  for 
establishing a knowledge base of IF-THEN rules: 
Input linguistic variables: 
1. Type of the source RDBMS (SOURCE_RDBMS) 
– a member of the set of RDBMS {Oracle, MySQL, 
MSSQL, PostgreSQL} 
2.  Data  type  of  the  attribute  in  the  source  database 
table,  supported  by  selected  source  RDBMS 

Advances in Data Networks, Communications, Computers and MaterialsISBN: 978-1-61804-118-0168(SOURCE_DATA_TYPE)  –  VARCHAR,  CHAR, 
TINYTEXT, MEDIUMTEXT, LONGTEXT, etc. 
3. Type  of  the  target RDBMS  (TARGET_RDBMS) 
– a member of the set of RDBMS {Oracle, MySQL, 
MSSQL, PostgreSQL} 
Output linguistic variable: 
1.  Data  type  of  the  attribute  in  the  target  database 
target  RDBMS 
table,  supported  by  selected 
(TARGET_DATA_TYPE) 
– 
VARCHAR2, 
NVARCHAR2, TEXT, CLOB, BLOB, etc. 
 
For  the  creating  of  knowledge  base  and  evaluation 
of  data  types,  the  LFLC  tool  will  be  used,  which  is 
described  in  [5].  LFLC  tool was  verified  on  various 
implementations [7], [8], [9]. 
For the definition of fuzzy sets for specific linguistic 
variables  we  can  use  difference  functions.  An 
example  of  the  usage  of  triangular  function  is  the 
definition  of  fuzzy  sets  for  the  types  of  the  source 
RDBMS, where each type of RDBMS is represented 
by triangular function: 
 

(RATE OF VARCHAR2 IS SMALL) 
 
IF (SOURCE_RDBMS IS MYSQL) AND  
(SOURCE_DATA_TYPE IS CHAR) AND 
(TARGET_RDBMS IS ORACLE) THEN 
(RATE OF BLOB IS VERY SMALL) 

For  clarity  and  practicability  of  the  proposed  expert 
system, we will  divide  knowledge  base  into  smaller 
knowledge  bases.  Each  knowledge  base  will 
represent  one  data  type  supported  by  the  target 
RDBMS and contains all IF-THEN rules, which can 
be  used  for  evaluating  of  data  type,  which  is 
represented  by  knowledge  base.  The  knowledge 
bases  of  the  selected  data  types,  supported  by  the 
target  RDBMS  Oracle  can  be  created  in  LFLC  tool 
as the .rb files: 
•  varchar2.rb 
•  nvarchar2.rb 
text.rb 
• 
•  blob.rb 
integer.rb 
• 
smallint.rb 
• 
We  use  the  hierachical  knowledge  base,  which  is 
composed  by  specific  knowledge  bases  for  data 
types  supported  by  the  target  RDBMS,  for  the 
proposal  and  evaluation  of  suitable  data  types. 
Evaluation  process  using  a  hierarchical  knowledge 
base is shown in the following figure: 

 

Fig. 2 Definition of fuzzy sets in LFLC tool 
 
In  the  input  data  file,  which  is  used  by  expert 
system,  we  fill  the  appropriate  RDBMS  using 
numbers: 
1 – MySQL, 2 – PostgreSQL, 3 – Oracle, etc. 
 
Based  on  the  input  and  output  linguistic  variables 
we  can  create  knowledge  base  of  IF-THEN  rules. 
Several examples of IF-THEN rules are below: 

IF (SOURCE_RDBMS IS MYSQL) AND  
(SOURCE_DATA_TYPE IS VARCHAR) AND 
(TARGET_RDBMS IS ORACLE) THEN 
(RATE OF VARCHAR2 IS EXTREMELY BIG) 
 
IF (SOURCE_RDBMS IS MYSQL) AND  
(SOURCE_DATA_TYPE IS TEXT) AND 
(TARGET_RDBMS IS ORACLE) THEN 

Fig. 3 Hierarchical knowledge base 

 

Advances in Data Networks, Communications, Computers and MaterialsISBN: 978-1-61804-118-0169A  hierarchical  knowledge  base  for  the  proposal  of 
A  hierarchical  knowledge  base  for  the  proposal  of 
target  database 
suitable  data 
target  datab
the 
for 
types 
suitable  data 
types 
for 
the 
implemented  in  the  target  RDBMS  Oracle  with 
implemented  in  the  target  RDBMS  Oracle  with 
selecting  the  data  type  VARCHAR  in  the  source 
selecting  the  data  type  VARCHAR  in  the  source 
database, 
database, 
implemented 
implemented 
in 
the  source  RDBMS 
in 
the  source  RDBMS 
MySQL, is shown below: 
•  varchar2.rb 
•  nvarchar2.rb 
char.rb 
• 
long.rb 
• 
•  blob.rb 
As  we  can  see,  the  hierarchical  knowledge  base 
As  we  can  see,  the  hierarchical  knowledge  base 
consists  of  appropriate  knowledge  bases 
onsists  of  appropriate  knowledge  bases 
for 
for 
types  supported  by 
evaluating  character  data 
evaluating  character  data 
types  supported  by 
RDBMS Oracle. 
Evaluation of suitable data type is represented as the 
Evaluation of suitable data type is represented as the 
number  of  fuzzy  set  A  on  universe  U,  which  is 
number  of  fuzzy  set  A  on  universe  U,  which  is 
understood as special function: 

 
  are  the  degrees  of 
are  the  degrees  of 
 in the fuzzy set A 
in the fuzzy set A 

where  the  values 
membership of an element  
[6]. 
In  our  case  values 
  determine 
suitability  of  the  data  type  for  an  attribute  in  a 
suitability  of  the  data  type  for  an  attribute  in  a 
database  table  of  the  target  database.  As  the  value 
database  table  of  the  target  database.  As  the  value 
  is  higher,  the  proposed  data  type  is  more 
igher,  the  proposed  data  type  is  more 
suitable for attribute  in a database table of  the  target 
suitable for attribute  in a database table of  the  target 
database.  
An  example  of  the  evaluation  of  suitable  data 
An  example  of  the  evaluation  of  suitable  data 
types  for  the  data  type  VARCHAR  in  source 
types  for  the  data  type  VARCHAR  in  source 
database  is shown below. The  target RDBMS  is 
database  is shown below. The  target RDBMS  is 
Oracle: 

Evaluation of suitable data types 
Table 1 Evaluation of suitable data types

subjects.  Database 
departments,  students  and 
departments,  students  and 
subjects.  Database 
consists of these database tables: 
consists of these database tables:
1.  faculty 
2.  department 
3.  student 
4.  subject 
 
4.1  Specification  of  the  source  and  target 
Specification  of  the  source  and  target 
RDBMS 
Firstly  we  need  to  specify  the  source  and  target 
tly  we  need  to  specify  the  source  and  target 
RDBMS.  This  is  very  important,  because  from  the 
RDBMS.  This  is  very  important,  because  from  the 
source  RDBMS  we  will  load  data  types  of  the 
source  RDBMS  we  will  load  data  types  of  the 
source  database  tables,  and  with  the  selected  target 
source  database  tables,  and  with  the  selected  target 
RDBMS  we  can  choose  appropriate  hierarchical 
RDBMS  we  can  choose  appropriate  hierarchical 
knowledge  bases  for  successful  proposal  and 
uccessful  proposal  and 
evaluation  of  suitable  data  types  for  target  database 
evaluation  of  suitable  data  types  for  target  database 
tables.  
In  our  case  we  choose  MySQL  as  the  source 
In  our  case  we  choose  MySQL  as  the  source 
RDBMS  of  the  source  database  and  Oracle  as  the 
RDBMS  of  the  source  database  and  Oracle  as  the 
target RDBMS of the target database.  
target RDBMS of the target database. 
Then  we  must  ensure  connection  to  the  source 
Then  we  must  ensure  connection  to  the  sourc
RDBMS.  In  our  tool  we  connect  to  the  source 
RDBMS.  In  our  tool  we  connect  to  the  source 
database  via  JDBC  driver.  Finally  we  choose  the 
database  via  JDBC  driver.  Finally  we  choose  the 
type  of  the  target  RDBMS  from  prepared  set  of 
type  of  the  target  RDBMS  from  prepared  set  of 
RDBMS.  The  process  of  connecting  to  the  source 
RDBMS.  The  process  of  connecting  to  the  source 
RDBMS  and  choosing  the  target  RDBMS  is  shown 
RDBMS  and  choosing  the  target  RDBMS  is  shown 
in the following figure:  
 

RATE 

0.99 
0.99 

TARGET 
TARGET 
DATA_TYPE 
DATA_TYPE  

SOURCE 
DATA 
TYPE 
VARCHAR  VARCHAR2
VARCHAR2 
 
NVARCHAR
NVARCHAR
2 
CHAR 
LONG 
BLOB 

SOURCE 
RDBMS 

MySQL 
MySQL 

 
 
 

0.97 
0.05 
0.03 

MySQL 
MySQL 
MySQL 
. 
 
4  Results 
The  proposed  expert  system  will  be  verified  by 
The  proposed  expert  system  will  be  verified  by 
created  tool  for  data  migration  between  various 
created  tool  for  data  migration  between  various 
types of RDBMS, which contains the expert system. 
types of RDBMS, which contains the expert system. 
Process  of  data migration  provided  by  the  proposed 
Process  of  data migration  provided  by  the  proposed 
tool  is  divided  to  five  steps,  which  are  explained 
tool  is  divided  to  five  steps,  which  are  explained 
below.  The  selected  database  for  data  migration  is 
e  selected  database  for  data  migration  is 
used 
to  storing 
used 
to  storing 
information  about 
information  about 
faculties, 
faculties, 

Fig. 4 Specification of the source and target 
Specification of the source and target 
RDBMS 
RDBMS

 

4.2  Loading  the  logical  structure  of  the 
Loading  the  logical  structure  of  the 
source database 
In  the  second  step  we  need  to  load  the  logical 
In  the  second  step  we  need  to  load  the  logical 
structure of the source database. 
structure of the source database.
We need to get these parts of the source database: 
We need to get these parts of the source database:
a)  Database tables and their attributes
ables and their attributes 
b)  Data types of attributes
Data types of attributes 
c)  Relationships between database tables
Relationships between database tables 

Advances in Data Networks, Communications, Computers and MaterialsISBN: 978-1-61804-118-0170We  can  load  these  parts  of  the  source  database 
implemented  in RDBMS MySQL  by  the  predefined 
methods in java.sql package: 

DatabaseMetaData meta = 
con.getMetaData(); 
tables =  
meta.getTables(null, null, null, 
new String[]{"TABLE"}); 
while (rs.next()) 
{ 
  String table_name = 
rs2.getString("TABLE_NAME"); 
ResultSet rsPrimaryKeys =  
meta.getPrimaryKeys(null, null, 
table_name); 
  while (rsPrimaryKeys.next()) 
  { 
columnPrimaryKey =  
rsPrimaryKeys.getString("COLUMN
_NAME"); 
  } 
ResultSet rsColumns =  
meta.getColumns(null, null, 
table_name, null); 
  while (rsColumns.next()) 
  { 
    String columnName =  
 
  rsColumns.getString("COLUMN_NAME"
);                
    String columnType = 
 
  rsColumns.getString("TYPE_NAME"); 
    String DataType = 
   
  rsColumns.getString("DATA_TYPE"); 
    int columnSize =  
 
  rsColumns.getInt("COLUMN_SIZE"); 
                  
  } 
} 

Logical  structure  of  the  source  database  is  shown  in 
the  following  figures,  in  first  figure  there  are 
database  tables,  attributes  and  data  types,  in  second 
figure  there  are  relationships  between  database 
tables: 
 

Fig. 5 Database tables of the selected database 

 

 

Fig. 6 Relationships between database tables in the 
selected database 

 
4.3  Proposal  of  suitable  data  types  by  expert 
system  
In  this  step  the  expert  system  proposes  appropriate 
data  types  for  the  target  database  tables  and  their 
attributes.  Firstly  the  tool  is  looking  for  suitable 
hierarchical  bases  for  each  attribute  in  the  source 
RDBMS.  Then 
the  expert  system  evaluates 
appropriate  data  types  proposed  for  the  specific 
attributes  in  the  target  database  tables.  Finally  the 
tool  shows  an  evaluated  and  sorted  list  of  suitable 
data  types  for  each  attribute  in  the  target  database. 
The  following  figure  shows  attributes  of  the  target 
database  tables  and  predefined  data  types  for  each 
attribute: 
 

 
Fig. 7 Suitable data types for the target database 

4.4 Selection of suitable data types  
The  database  specialist  chooses  the  most  suitable 
data  type  for  each  attribute  in  database  tables  of  the 
target  database  or  he  can  use  predefined  data  types, 
which  are  proposed  by  expert  system  as  the  first 

Advances in Data Networks, Communications, Computers and MaterialsISBN: 978-1-61804-118-0171suitable  data  types  for  the  specific  attribute.  The 
following  figure  shows  possibility  of  choosing 
various  character  data 
types  for 
the  specific 
attribute: 
 

 
Fig. 8 Selecting the most suitable data type for the 
specific attribute 

4.5  Generating  SQL  dump  file  for  creating 
the target database in the RDBMS 
Finally  the  tool generates SQL dump file consists of 
complete  physical  model  of  the  target  database 
(database  tables,  attributes,  primary  and  foreign 
keys)  and  data  contained  in  database  tables.  SQL 
dump file can then be imported to RDBMS Oracle.  
The  following  figure  presents  the  database  table 
department,  which  was  migrated  from  the  source 
RDBMS  MySQL  to  the  target  RDBMS  Oracle  as 
the completion of the data migration process: 
 

 
Fig.  9  Database  table  department  in  the  target 
RDBMS 
 
 
5  Conclusion 
The  article  analyzed  current  state  in  the  area  of 
database  migration  between  various 
types  of 
RDBMS  and  identified  problems  and  disadvantages 
of  current  tools  for migration  of  databases  and  their 
data.  Then  we  proposed  the  expert  system  for 
decision  support  during  the  migration  process.  An 
expert  system  proposes  and  evaluates  suitable  data 
types  for  attributes  of  database  tables  in  the  target 
database.  After  this  the  database  specialist  chooses 

the  most  suitable  data  types  for  specified  attributes 
in  the  target  database.  Proposed  expert  system  was 
verified by created tool, which can migrate database 
and  their data  from  the  source RDBMS  to  the  target 
RDBMS.  Finally,  we  presented  created  tool  on  the 
process  of  data  migration  of  the  selected  database 
migrated  from MySQL  to Oracle. An  expert  system 
and  its  knowledge  base  can  be  easily  extended  for 
using in various types of RDBMS. 
 
 
6  Acknowledgment 
Presented  topic  is  also  a  part  of  internal  grant 
SGS10/PřF/2012,  called  Fuzzy  modeling  tools  for 
analysis  and  design  of  information  systems,  at 
Department 
of 
Infomatics 
and  Computers, 
University of Ostrava. 
 
 
References: 
[1]  Morris J., Practical data migration, The British 
Computer Society, 2009. 
[2]  Atzeni  P.,  De  Antonellis  V.,  Relational 
Database  Theory,  The  Benjamin/Cummings 
Publishing Company, Inc., 1993. 
[3]  Harrington  L.  Jan.,  Relational  database  design 
and implementation, Elsevier Inc., 2009. 
[4]  ISO,  ANSI:  Framework  (SQL/Framework), 
International  Organization  for  Standardization, 
2003. 
[5]  Habiballa  H.,  Novák  V.,  Dvořák  A.,  Pavliska 
V.,  Using  software  package  LFLC  2000,  2nd 
International  Conference  Aplimat  2003,  2003, 
pp. 355-358. 
[6]  Klimeš  C.,  Model  of  adaptation  under 
indeterminacy,  Kybernetika,  Vol.47,  No.3, 
2011, pp. 355 – 368. 
[7]  Bartoš  J.  Walek    B.,  Smolka  P.,  Procházka  J., 
Klimeš  C., Fuzzy  modeling 
tools 
for 
information  system  testing,  17th  International 
Conference  on  Soft  Computing  Mendel  2011, 
Brno, 2011, pp. 154-161. 
[8]  Walek  B.,  Bartoš  J.,  Smolka  P.,  Masár  J., 
Procházka  J.,  Klimeš  C.,  Creating  component 
model of information system under uncertainty, 
18th 
International  Conference  on  Soft 
Computing Mendel  2012,  Brno,  2012,  pp. 221-
226. 
[9]  Walek  B.,  Bartos  J.,  Klimes  C.,  Prochazka  J., 
Smolka  P.,  Masar  J.,  Pesl M.,  Fuzzy  modeling 
tool  for  creating  a  component  model  of 
information  system,  International  Conference 
on Fuzzy Systems and Neural Computing 2012, 
Paris, 2012, pp. 732-735.  

Advances in Data Networks, Communications, Computers and MaterialsISBN: 978-1-61804-118-0172