Design and Implementation of Graphical User 
Interface for Relational Database Management 
System  
 
Manoj E. Patil,, Ravi N. Mulchandani, Ravikumar R. Ahuja 
Department of Computer, SSBT’s COET Bambhori,, Jalgaon. (MS) India 
 

 

working  with  different  RDBMS  like  SQL  Server,  Oracle  etc. 
The main objective of the system is to enable a user work with 
the  databases  and  tables  in  a  RDBMS  even  if  he/she  doesn’t 
have any knowledge of SQL.                              
The product is aimed at accomplishing the following: 
  Create, rename and drop databases  
  View  and  work  with  database  objects  like  tables, 
queries, forms and reports 
  View  the  database  profile  and  table  that  exists  in  a 
particular RDBMS 
  Preparing  and  printing  various  reports  containing 
information  about  existing databases  and objects  in a 
database, if needed 
  Provide  a  provision  i.e.  a  SQL  query  analyzer  for 
executing queries in SQL mode, if required  

Abstract-This  paper  will  explain  the  concept  of  creating  a 
Graphical  User  Interface 
for 
three  Relational  Database 
Management  Systems.  This  is  a  general-level GUI, which  can  be 
connected to any database residing on the system such as Oracle, 
MS  SQL  Server,  and  MS  Access.  As  a  result,  any  database 
manipulation can be performed using single interface. Moreover, 
the  queries  can  be  executed  very  easily,  since  the  user  needs  not 
to type any queries, but can simply select the appropriate options 
according  to  their  requirements. Thus,  this  software  can  be  used 
by  a  person  with  no  knowledge  of  SQL.  This  software  is 
developed  using  Java  as  front  end  and  Oracle,  MS  SQL  Server 
and MS Access as backend. 
 
Keywords: Relational Database  
 

I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Database  Management  Systems  or  DBMS  has  evolved 
from  a  specialized  computer  application 
to  a  central 
component  of  modern  computing  environment.  DBMS 
consists  of  a  collection  of  interrelated  data  and  a  set  of 
programs  to  access  those  data.  This  collection  of  data  is 
referred  to  as  a  database.  Database  Management  System 
involves  both  the  definition  of  structures  for  the  storage  of 
information 
and  provision  of  mechanisms 
for 
the 
manipulation of information. 
A  collection  of  conceptual  tools  for  describing  data,  data 
relationships,  data  semantics  and  consistency  constraints  is 
called  a  data  model.  There  are  different  data  models,  among 
which  Relational Database Management  System  (RDBMS)  is 
the most popular choice for large scale application. 
The RDBMS uses a collection of  tables  to  represent both data 
and  the  relationships  among  those  data.  Each  table  has 
multiple columns and each column has unique name and fixed 
data  type.  Each  table  in  the  database  has  a  unique  name 
assigned to it.                   
The  RDBMS  has  established  itself  as  the  primary  data 
model  for  commercial  data  processing  applications.  RDBMS 
is  now  being  used  in  numerous  applications  outside  the 
domain of traditional data processing. 
To  interact  with  the  database  and  work  with  the  tables  in  it, 
one  need  to  use  Structured  Query  Language  (SQL)  which 
includes  features  on  defining  structure  of  the  data,  for 
modifying  data  in  the  database  and  for  specifying  security 
constraints.           
The  project  entitled  ‘Graphical  user  interface  for  RDBMS 
is  aimed  at  providing  a  user  friendly  and  single  interface  for 

 
 

II. 
STUDY OF EXISTING SYSYTEM 
We  have  many  database  management  systems  available  in 
the  market,  many  of  them  with  friendly  Graphical  User 
Interfaces,  using  which  the  users  can  execute  queries  and 
handle  tables  and  other  objects.  However,  the  GUIs  provided 
by  each  database  server  are  exclusive  to  its  own  database.  
Moreover, a person with little technical knowledge will find it 
difficult to use one. 
 
Limitations of the Existing System 
  GUIs  provided  by  most  of  the  database  is  exclusive 
to its own database 
  Working  with  different  databases  through  a  single 
friendly interface is impossible 
  The  features  and  functionality  provided  by  each 
GUIs differ from one RDBMS to another 
  A GUI  that provides a friendly environment  to a user 
with  little  knowledge  of  SQL  in  such  a  way  that  he 
can  work  with  more  than  one  type  of  databases  is 
hard to find. 
The  RDBMS  uses  a  collection  of  tables  to  represent  both 
data  and  the  relationships  among  those  data.  Each  table  has 
multiple columns and each column has unique name and fixed 
data  type.  Each  table  in  the  database  has  a  unique  name 
assigned to it. 
The  software  is  developed  using  Java  as  front  end  using 
MSSQL  Server,  MS  Access  and  Oracle.    The  software  is 

Manoj E. Patil et al, / (IJCSIT) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technologies, Vol. 3 (3) , 2012,3871-38743871the 

developed with the keen intention of creating a Graphical User 
Interface for 3 Relational Database Management System. 
 
III. 
STUDY OF PROPOSED SYSTEM 
The  product  entitled  GUI  for  RDBMS  is  developed  with 
the  keen  intention  of  creating  a  Graphical  User  Interface  for 
commonly used Relational Database Management System like 
MSSQL Server, Oracle etc. This is a general-level GUI, which 
can  be  connected  to  more  than  one  database  residing  on  the 
system.  As  a  result,  any  database  manipulation  can  be 
performed  using  a  single  product.  Moreover,  the  queries  can 
be  executed  very  easily,  since  the  user  need  not  type  any 
queries,  but  can  simply  select  the  appropriate  options 
according  to  their  requirements.  Thus,  this  product  can  be 
used by a person with no knowledge of SQL 
  Database Creation 
In  case  of  MS  SQL  Server,  by  clicking  on 
corresponding icon, a new database can be created. 
  Database Login 
Once  a  database  is  created,  a  user  can  login  to  his/her 
database  and,  after which  he/she  can work with  the  objects  in 
the  database.  In  case  of  Oracle,  we  are  always  automatically 
logged  into  the  default  database  of  Oracle  and  we  can  login 
into the same as different users. 
  Database Rename 
A  database  in MSSQL  server  can  be  renamed  by  selecting 
the corresponding option. 
  Database Drop 
There  is  an  option  provided  for  dropping  an  already 
existing  database  when  the  GUI  is  connected  to  the  MSSQL 
Server. 
 
Database Profile  
The user can monitor and view the database properties, like 
name, owner, and size, date of creation, status and contents. 
 
Objects  
 
 
The  user  can  access  the  opened  database  through  a 
Graphical User Interface. Through this   interface, the user can 
view  and  work  with  the  database  objects  like  tables,  queries 
and reports. 
  Create Table 
The  user  can  create  tables  in  the  selected  database.  A 
design  view  is  provided,  through  which  the  user  can  simply 
enter  the  field  name,  select  the  data  type  from  a  select  list. 
There  are  separate  options  for  setting  a  field  as  primary, 
unique,  or  not  null.  There  is  also  an  option  for  adding 
checking constraint on a field or a default value in a field.  
 
  View Table 
This  option  enables  the  user  to  view  the  contents  (rows)  in 
a table.   
  Execute Queries 
The  user  can  execute  any  query  on  the  database  using  the 
user-friendly graphical interface. All the tables in the database 
are  listed,  from  which  the  user  can  select  the  one(s)  in  which 
he/she has to execute the query. The user can select the type of 
query  to  be  executed  (like  select,  update,  make-table  and 
delete).    The  field(s)  in  the  table(s)  in which  the  query  has  to 

be executed can be  selected  from a  list and  the conditions can 
be  input,  all  using  the  graphical  interface.  The  conditions  can 
include  sorting  (ascending,  descending  or  none),  fields  to  be 
displayed,  criteria  and  any  other  specification,  if  any.  The 
result of the query action is exhibited. 
 
  Select  
User can first select a  table, and  then execute select queries 
on it. Select query can be executed in different ways: 
  Specific  fields  or  all  fields  in  a  table  can  be 
displayed. 
  Only distinct fields can be displayed if required 
  Aggregate function can be applied to a field selected 
  Field  or  fields  satisfying  a  specific  condition  can  be 
selected 
  Selection  can  also  be made  using Order  by  or Group  
by clause  

 
                                           
  Alter 
Any  alteration on  the  table  can be made on a  selected  table 
using  this  option.  Alterations  that  can  be  made  includes  the 
following 
  Alter  the  data  type  of  a  existing  field  in  the  selected 
table 
  Altering  the  selected  table  by  adding  a  new  field  to 
the table 
  Altering  the  selected  table  by  dropping    an  existing 
field in the table 
  Altering the selected table by adding a constraint to a 
field in the table 
  Altering  the  selected  table  by  dropping    a  constraint 
specified on the field in the table 
 
  Update 
This  option  is  used  for  making  any  updating  on  a  selected 
table.  Any  condition  for  updating  can  also  be  specified  if 
required. 
  Delete 
This  option  is  used  for  deleting  rows  from  a  selected  table. 
Deletion  can  also  be  performed  by  specifying  condition  so 
that only rows satisfying that condition is deleted.  
  Drop 
This  option  allows  a  user  to  drop  an  already  existing  table 
from a database 
 
Insert 
Using  this  option  the  user  can  insert  rows  into  an  existing 
table. 
 
 
  SQL query analyzer 
If  required,  the  user  can  execute  queries  in  SQL mode,  not 
using  the  graphical  interface.  A  separate      workspace  is 
provided, where the query can be typed and executed. 
 
 

 

Manoj E. Patil et al, / (IJCSIT) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technologies, Vol. 3 (3) , 2012,3871-38743872IV. 

SYSTEM DESIGN 

Fig. 3 Connection Dialog 
 
In GUI for RDBMS, there is a dialog box for user using 
which he/she can select the database system such as Oracle, 
SQL Server, and MS Access. 
 

 

Fig. 1 System Architecture 

 

 

User  selects  appropriate  database  system  such  as  Oracle, 
MS  access,  MS  SQL  server.  After  selecting  database  system 
user  will  perform  either  DDL  or  DML  commands.  Query 
execution  unit  will  execute  a  query  and  make  changes  to 
databases.  Query  execution  unit  will  also  provide  result  to 
user. 
 

 

Fig. 4 Main Window 
 
In GUI for RDBMS, there is a panel on the left hand side of 
the  window  which  shows  the  name  of  tables  existing  in  the 
database.  By  clicking  on  a  particular  table  user  can  view  the 
contents of that table.  
 

 

Fig. 2 User Interface Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V. 

SCREEN LAYOUTS 

 

 

Fig. 5 Query Analyzer 

 
In GUI  for RDBMS,  there  is  an option  for Query Analyzer 
using  which  user  can  type  and  execute  different  queries  if 
he/she  is  having  knowledge  of  SQL  (Structured  Query 
Language). 

 

Manoj E. Patil et al, / (IJCSIT) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technologies, Vol. 3 (3) , 2012,3871-38743873 

Fig. 6 Table Create 
 
In GUI  for  RDBMS,  there  in  an  option  for  a  user  to  create 
table.  In  this  user  have  to  specify  the  name  of  table,  columns 
and can apply constraints. 
 

 

the  requirements, we can write  separate program modules and 
combine  them  to  the  main  program.  For  e.g.:  the  system  can 
be  further  enhanced  to  handle  nested  queries,  sub  queries  etc 
.An  option  for  backing  up  databases  and  restoring  them  is 
another enhancement. 
 

REFERENCES 
[1] Roger S. Pressman,“Software Engineering”, Fifth Edition,                
McGraw-Hill Companies 
[2] Herbert Schildit, “ Java 2 The Complete Reference “,           
Fifth Edition , McGraw-Hill. 
[3] Robert Eckstein, Mare Loy & Dave Wood “Java Swing”  , 
O’Reilly 
  Sudarshan,”  Database  System 
[4]  Silberschatz  Korth, 
Concepts”, Fourth Edition, Foxit PDF  
[5]  Carlos  Eduardo  Rojas,”Microsoft  SQL  Server  2000 
Programming by Example”, Que Publication 
 

Fig.7 Edit Table 
 
In GUI for RDBMS, there in an option for a user to edit 
table. In this user can insert new row, delete an existing row 
and modify row. 
 

 

VI.  CONCLUSIONS 
The  system  is  developed  aiming  at  helping  a  user  easily 
access  and  work  with  databases  in  different    RDBMS,  even 
he/she  have  little  knowledge  of  SQL.  Also  the  developed 
system  provides  a  single  interface  for  communicating  with 
more  than one type of RDBMS. The new system  is developed 
in  Java  using  MS  SQL  Server,  MS  Access  and  Oracle.  MS 
SQL  Server  and  Oracle  are  two  commonly  used  RDBMS, 
very efficient back end tool for handling databases. The Swing 
class of  Java helped  to  create many user  friendly  features  like 
menus, buttons, messages etc in the system. 
 

VII.  FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 
the  changing 
to 
the  system  adaptive 
For  making 
environment,  it  will  be  necessary  that  the  system  will  be 
required to handle some more functions in the future to satisfy 

Manoj E. Patil et al, / (IJCSIT) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technologies, Vol. 3 (3) , 2012,3871-38743874