YTPdb: A wiki database of yeast membrane transporters
Sylvain Brohée a,1
, Roland Barriot a,b,c,2
, Yves Moreau a,3
, Bruno André d,
⁎
a ESAT-SCD, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
b Université de Toulouse, UPS, Laboratoire de Microbiologie et Génétique Moléculaires, F-31000 Toulouse, France
c Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, LMGM, F-31000 Toulouse, France d Physiologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Rue des Pr, Jeener et Brachet, B-6041 Gosselies, Belgium
article info abstract
Article history:
Received 19 February 2010
Received in revised form 17 May 2010
Accepted 7 June 2010
Available online 19 June 2010
Keywords:
yeast
transporter
database
Membrane transporters constitute one of the largest functional categories of proteins in all organisms. In the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this represents about 300 proteins (∼5% of the proteome). We here present
the Yeast Transport Protein database (YTPdb), a user-friendly collaborative resource dedicated to the
precise classification and annotation of yeast transporters. YTPdb exploits an evolution of the MediaWiki
web engine used for popular collaborative databases like Wikipedia, allowing every registered user to edit
the data in a user-friendly manner. Proteins in YTPdb are classified on the basis of functional criteria such as
subcellular location or their substrate compounds. These classifications are hierarchical, allowing queries to
be performed at various levels, from highly specific (e.g. ammonium as a substrate or the vacuole as a
location) to broader (e.g. cation as a substrate or inner membranes as location). Other resources accessible
for each transporter via YTPdb include post-translational modifications, Km values, a permanently updated
bibliography, and a hierarchical classification into families. The YTPdb concept can be extrapolated to other
organisms and could even be applied for other functional categories of proteins. YTPdb is accessible at
http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/ytpdb/.
© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The membrane transporter functional class of proteins is typically
one of the most abundantly represented in cellular proteomes. The
estimated percentage of predicted membrane transporters ranges
from 2% to 10% in bacteria and 2% to 7% in eukaryotes. It is 2.7% in the
human species [1]. These proteins facilitate the transport of a very
wide variety of small compounds (small ions, organic compounds,
short peptides, water, etc.) across the lipid bilayers of the plasma and
internal membranes. Most inventoried transporters belong to families
conserved throughout evolution [2].
Among the 5690 protein-encoding genes of the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae [3], almost 300 code for established or predicted
transmembrane transporters [4]. Established transporters are those for
which experimental evidence of a direct role in transmembrane
transport of specific compounds is available. Predicted transporters
share significant sequence similarity with at least one experimentally
characterized transporter from any organism, but their functions
remain unknown: although the subcellular locations of many of them
have been determined by large-scale analysis [5], the compounds they
recognize have not been identified and their roles in cell metabolism
thus remain unknown.
Specialized databases of membrane transporters have previously
been implemented (links accessible via YTPdb). For instance, the
Transport Classification Database (TCDB) provides a classification
system for membrane transporters of all organisms into no less than
550 families [2], and the related TransportDB lists all transporters
predicted from completely sequenced genomes [1]. Other databases
categorize transporters or membrane proteins of a single or a small
number of organisms, e.g. the Yeast Transport Information (YETI) [6],
the Yeast Membrane Protein Library (YMPL) [7], or the Plant
Membrane protein Database (Aramemnon) [8]. There also exist
databases supplying information about one type of transporters in
different organisms (e.g. P-type ATPases [9]). Lastly, information
about membrane transporters is also accessible through databases
collecting data on the complete sets of genes and proteins of specific
organisms, e.g. the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) [10] or
the Comprehensive Yeast Genome Database (CYGD) [11].
Yet molecular biologists working in the membrane transport field
also need databases providing classification systems based on the
main functional properties of listed proteins, e.g. their substrate
compounds and subcellular locations. Furthermore, these databases
should ideally include annotations about the affinity constants (Km),
membrane topology, post-translational modifications, as well as an
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1798 (2010) 1908–1912
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +32 2 6509958.
E-mail addresses: Sylvain.Brohee@esat.kuleuven.be (S. Brohée),
roland.barriot@biotoul.fr (R. Barriot), yves.moreau@esat.kuleuven.be (Y. Moreau),
bran@ulb.ac.be (B. André). 1 Tel.: +32 16 328643. 2 Tel.: +33 5 61335821. 3 Tel.: +32 16 328645.
0005-2736/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2010.06.008
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bbamem
up-to-date bibliography. It seems obvious that such goal is only
achievable if this database can be updated through a user-friendly
interface by several users having expertise in the field. We have
applied these criteria to implement the Yeast Transport Protein database
(YTPdb: http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/ytpdb/), a web-accessible
database devoted to the precise classification and annotation
of S. cerevisiae membrane transport proteins. Besides its main features
described below, YTPdb is presented in the form of a wiki, i.e. on the
model of the well-known web encyclopedia Wikipedia. Any registered
user can thus freely edit data in the database and add or remove
data. We think that the YTPdb concept is extensible to other
organisms and even to other functional classes of proteins.
2. Results
2.1. YTPdb content
The Yeast Transporter Protein database provides manually annotated
information on 299 yeast proteins classified as established (199)
or predicted (100) membrane transporters (see Introduction). These
299 proteins correspond to the 337 proteins predicted to be transporters
by the TransportTP server [12] from which 38 have not been
considered because they correspond to subunits of protein translocation
systems, of the mitochondrial ATP synthase, of the vacuolar H+
pump, to non-membrane proteins containing the ABC (ATP-binding
cassette) motif, and to several enzymes (e.g. HMG-CoA reductases,
lipid modification enzymes, etc.) and membrane proteins which may
not be classified as established or predicted transporters. For each
protein, YTPdb provides a page including a short description, the list
of substrates, and the subcellular location (Fig. 1). Clicking on a substrate
gives the list of all proteins transporting this compound and
clicking on a protein's location gives the list of proteins colocalized
in this cell compartment. An originality of YTPdb is that functional
classification criteria such as subcellular location and recognized
substrates are organized in a tree-like fashion. For instance, a glucose
transporter is also classified as a transporter of hexose, monosaccharide,
and carbohydrate and a cytosine transporter as a protein transporting
pyrimidine and nucleobase. Similarly, a protein localizing to
the Golgi compartment is also classified as a protein present in the
Golgi and endosome membrane system, in the secretory pathway
membrane system, and in internal membranes. It is thus possible –
using the “Browse by substrate”, “Browse by substrate categories”,
and “Browse by subcellular location” query tools – to retrieve proteins
on the basis of very specific or broader criteria. For instance, the user
can list all calcium or leucine transporters but also those for cations,
amino acids, etc. Similarly, the user can view all transporters present
in the “late endosome” or in the less defined “Golgi and endosomal
membrane” system. This mode of classification is convenient in the
case of proteins whose properties have been characterized with only
limited precision. For instance, the P-type ATPase Neo1 has been
located in the Golgi and/or endosomal membrane [13,14]. YTPdb
contains a total list of 315 chemical compounds (plus 65 synonyms)
and 28 subcellular locations, corresponding to the branch extremities
of the tree-like classification schemes. The affinity constants (Km) for
substrates (136 values in the May 2010 version of YTPdb) with the
corresponding references are also accessible.
Transporters encoded in YTPdb are also classified according to the
transport classification (TC) system [2] (Fig. 1). Using the “Browse by
TC class” option, proteins at any level of the TC classification can be
listed, e.g. all channels/pores (22 proteins) or the Major Intrinsic
Protein (MIP) Family (4 proteins). We have developed another
classification system (YTPdb classification) including more subdivisions
and more suited to yeast transporters. For instance, P-type
ATPases (16 proteins in S. cerevisiae) form a unique class of proteins in
TC, whereas they are subdivided into six subfamilies in the YTP
classification. The YTP classification also provides a multiple sequence
alignment computed by the Muscle algorithm [15].
An important feature of transporters is the topology they adopt in
the membrane. For each protein, YTPdb gives access to a web page
recapitulating the data of topology prediction generated by seven
distinct algorithms.
Many protein databases do not provide an updated bibliography
for protein entries. In YTPdb, two systems have been implemented to
associate each transporter with references. The “All references” option
is based on an editable Boolean formula retrieving references from the
PubMed.gov server, and the corresponding bibliography is thus permanently
updated. Through the “Curated references” option, the user
can generate a list of references classified into several categories. For
instance, “Early studies” provides references about studies preceding
the molecular characterization of the transporter gene, “Initial
molecular characterization, general properties and function” include
references about the functional characterisation of the transporter.
Other categories (eight in all) list references about “Intracellular
trafficking and its regulation”, “Gene expression and its regulation”,
“Transport activity (including influence of mutations) and its
regulation”, etc. Curated lists of references are currently available
for about 40 transporters. As mentioned below, registered curators are
invited to associate references with their favorite transporters.
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) play a central role in
regulation of protein function. This is well illustrated for yeast
transporters, e.g., ubiquitylation typically targets these proteins for
degradation in the vacuole [16] and many yeast transporters have
been shown to be phosphorylated. A special effort has been devoted
to including in YTPdb all known PTMs of yeast transporters deduced
from studies centered on specific proteins and from large-scale mass
spectrometry analyses [17–25]. In the current version of YTPdb (May
2010), 764 unique PTMs have been encoded for 123 transporters. For
each protein, these PTMs are presented in a recapitulative table with
references, and their relative positions are indicated in a figure
showing the predicted transmembrane regions [26], global topology,
and positions of conserved PFAM domains [27] of the protein (Fig. 2).
This convenient presentation facilitates comparisons between proteins
of the same family and detection of possible recurrent PTM
profiles. For instance, many amino acid permeases are palmitoylated
at their C-termini [28], and their cytosolic N-terminal tails often
contain several phosphorylated serines and threonines as well as
ubiquitylated lysines.
YTPdb also associates each transporter with direct links to wellknown
databases (MIPS [29], Ensembl [30], SGD [10]) to a repository
of gene expression data (ArrayExpress) [31] and to the Yeast Gene
Order Browser [32]. The latter is an online tool for visualizing the
syntenic context of any gene from twelve hemiascomycete species;
this is particularly useful for detecting the many pairs of transporter
genes deriving from the whole genome duplication event that
occurred in an ancestor of the S. cerevisiae lineage [33,34].
2.2. YTPdb is a collaborative database
There is no longer any need to introduce Wiki technology. The past
few years have seen an explosion in the number of wiki-based web
sites, ranging from very general (e.g. the well-known Wikipedia,
wiktionnary) to more specialized or biological (wikiproteins [35],
wikipathways [36], wikipedia for genes [37], etc). YTPdb is a wiki
based on an extension of MediaWiki technology (running Wikipedia).
This implies that almost all data in the database can be freely edited
and extended by any registered user. For instance, specific and readily
editable forms are available for adding Km values, post-translational
modifications, and references and for editing the basic information
(substrate compounds, subcellular location, gene synonyms, Boolean
formula to retrieve references, etc.) on each transporter. A similar
form is available for adding or editing substrate compounds
S. Brohée et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1798 (2010) 1908–1912 1909
(synonyms, classification). Furthermore, by clicking on the “Edit” link
at the top of a page (or on the “Create” link, when free text has not yet
been included in the page), it is possible to include additional
comments and figures about, e.g., a specific transporter (Fig. 1),
transporter family, substrate compound, cell compartment, etc. For
this, the user is also redirected to a form where free text can be
entered as in standard word processors. Finally, as in Wikipedia, it is
possible to create from scratch new pages editable by users. Extensive
information about the editing process of YTP is available in the
Tutorial section of the database.
One drawback of classical wikis is that the data are stored in free
text format in a main unique underlying database. This differs from
Fig. 1. A YTPdb protein report. The “Family” section gives access to the protein family and upper-level families to which the protein belongs; the “Substrates” section presents the list
of compounds recognized by the transporter; the “Location” section gives access to its subcellular location. By clicking on a given substrate or on the subcellular location, all
transporters recognizing this compound or colocalized with the protein are shown. The other sections provide access to a list of Km values for different substrates, post-translational
modifications, external links, sequences, and references (see text). Numbers between brackets specify the quantity of encoded data. By clicking on “edit” links, the user can introduce
free text (e.g. Remarks).
1910 S. Brohée et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1798 (2010) 1908–1912
most biological databases, where data are stored in well-structured
repositories, and web pages are generated by extracting a set of
entries from different tables. To circumvent this problem, YTPdb
makes use of WikiOpener, an extension for the classical MediaWiki
engine that augments Wiki pages by allowing on-the-fly querying,
editing, and formatting resources external to the Wiki (MediaWiki
web site: http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:WikiOpener).
Those resources may correspond to data extracted from databases, flat
files, DAS tracks, or even results returned by local or remote
bioinformatics analysis tools. WikiOpener has already been successfully
used in the frame of another biological database that aims at
depicting the relationships between human heart defects and gene
alterations [38]. In the case of YTPdb, WikiOpener mainly queries a
relational database, distinct from the main database used to populate
the pages of the wiki. Moreover, WikiOpener uses the PubMed
identifier of references to connect to the NCBI web services and gather
the references details which are stored in the YTPdb relational
database. WikiOpener also determines the presentation format of
these queries within the wiki. The PHP code of the YTPdb components
as well as the scheme of the relational database can be obtained by
simple request to the authors.
3. Discussion
YTPdb displays several features distinguishing it from other
protein databases and useful to experts in the transport field as well
as to occasional users. Transporters can be retrieved from hierarchical
classification systems based on substrate specificity, subcellular
location, and similarities of primary structure. YTPdb also includes
Km values and all reported post-translational modifications. Importantly,
these annotations are based solely on experimental data
available in the literature and source references are indicated.
Furthermore, YTPdb is a collaborative database, meaning that any
registered user is invited to modify and update entries related to his/
her expertise. The web engine running YTPdb is the same as the one
running the Wikipedia web encyclopedia, making editing and adding
information easy and straightforward for people having less computer
skills. The advantage of a collaborative database is that it can be
constantly updated by multiple curators. This reduces the risk of the
database progressively becoming obsolete, as often occurs with small
specialized biological databases [39–41]. The disadvantage of a
collaborative database is that users can potentially add wrong
information. In the case of YTPdb, however, curators have to register
(a difference with Wikipedia) allowing the administrator to limit
access of YTPdb to scientists active in the field. We propose that the
concept and structure of YTPdb is transposable to other species for
which availability of a transporter database would be beneficial to the
scientific community. We also think that YTPdb can serve as a model
for databases of other functional categories of proteins.
Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Daniel Van Belle for creating with BA the initial
version of YTPdb. We thank Jacques van Helden, Robert Herzog, Marc
Colet, and Antonio Urrestarazu for constant support and encouragement.
We also thank Morgane Thomas-Chollier, Elsa Lauwers,
Eckhard Boles, and Valérie Ledent for many helpful discussions.
Finally, we thank Olivier Cagnac, Hana Sychrova, Emmanuel Lesuisse,
and Juergen Stolz for adding the first external contributions to YTPdb.
SB was the recipient of a PhD grant from the Belgian Fonds pour la
Fig. 2. Example of a report presenting the post-translational modifications associated with a specific yeast transporter. These modifications are reported on a protein map, together
with the PFAM functional domains and the predicted transmembrane segments.
S. Brohée et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1798 (2010) 1908–1912 1911
Formation à la Recherche dans l'Industrie et l'Agriculture (FRIA) and is
now supported by the E.U. FP7 CHeartED project. KULeuven SCDSISTA
lab is funded by grants provided by the (1) Research Council
KUL: GOA MaNet, CoE EF/05/007 SymBioSys; (2) IWT: SBO-MoKa;
(3) the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office: IUAP P6/25 (BioMaGNet);
and (4) the European Union: FP7-HEALTH CHeartED.
References
[1] Q. Ren, K. Chen, I.T. Paulsen, TransportDB: a comprehensive database resource for
cytoplasmic membrane transport systems and outer membrane channels, Nucleic
Acids Res. 35 (2007) D274–D279.
[2] M.H. Saier Jr., M.R. Yen, K. Noto, D.G. Tamang, C. Elkan, The Transporter Classifi-
cation Database: recent advances, Nucleic Acids Res. 37 (2009) D274–D278.
[3] A. Goffeau, B.G. Barrell, H. Bussey, R.W. Davis, B. Dujon, H. Feldmann, F. Galibert, J.D.
Hoheisel, C. Jacq, M. Johnston, E.J. Louis, H.W. Mewes, Y. Murakami, P. Philippsen,
H. Tettelin, S.G. Oliver, Life with 6000 genes, Science 274 (1996) 546, 563–546,
567.
[4] D. Van Belle, B. André, A genomic view of yeast membrane transporters, Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 13 (2001) 389–398.
[5] W.K. Huh, J.V. Falvo, L.C. Gerke, A.S. Carroll, R.W. Howson, J.S. Weissman, E.K.
O'Shea, Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast, Nature 425 (2003)
686–691.
[6] B. De Hertogh, E. Carvajal, E. Talla, B. Dujon, P. Baret, A. Goffeau, Phylogenetic
classification of transporters and other membrane proteins from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, Funct. Integr Genomics 2 (2002) 154–170.
[7] J.M. Ward, Identification of novel families of membrane proteins from the model
plant Arabidopsis thaliana, Bioinformatics. 17 (2001) 560–563.
[8] R. Schwacke, A. Schneider, E. van der Graaff, K. Fischer, E. Catoni, M. Desimone, W.B.
Frommer, U.I. Flugge, R. Kunze, ARAMEMNON, a novel database for Arabidopsis
integral membrane proteins, Plant Physiol 131 (2003) 16–26.
[9] K.B. Axelsen, M.G. Palmgren, Evolution of substrate specificities in the P-type
ATPase superfamily, J. Mol. Evol. 46 (1998) 84–101.
[10] S.R. Engel, R. Balakrishnan, G. Binkley, K.R. Christie, M.C. Costanzo, S.S. Dwight, D.G.
Fisk, J.E. Hirschman, B.C. Hitz, E.L. Hong, C.J. Krieger, M.S. Livstone, S.R. Miyasato, R.
Nash, R. Oughtred, J. Park, M.S. Skrzypek, S.Weng, E.D.Wong, K. Dolinski, D. Botstein,
J.M. Cherry, Saccharomyces Genome Database provides mutant phenotype data,
Nucleic Acids Res. 38 (2010) D433–D436.
[11] U. Guldener, M. Munsterkotter, G. Kastenmuller, N. Strack, J. van Helden, C. Lemer,
J. Richelle, S.J. Wodak, J. Garcia-Martinez, J.E. Perez-Ortin, H. Michael, A. Kaps, E.
Talla, B. Dujon, B. Andre, J.L. Souciet, J. De Montigny, E. Bon, C. Gaillardin, H.W.
Mewes, CYGD: the Comprehensive Yeast Genome Database, Nucleic Acids Res. 33
(2005) D364–D368.
[12] H. Li, X. Dai, X. Zhao, A nearest neighbor approach for automated transporter
prediction and categorization from protein sequences, Bioinformatics. 24 (2008)
1129–1136.
[13] S. Wicky, H. Schwarz, B. Singer-Kruger, Molecular interactions of yeast Neo1p, an
essential member of the Drs2 family of aminophospholipid translocases, and its
role in membrane trafficking within the endomembrane system, Mol. Cell Biol. 24
(2004) 7402–7418.
[14] Z. Hua, T.R. Graham, Requirement for neo1p in retrograde transport from the
Golgi complex to the endoplasmic reticulum, Mol. Biol. Cell 14 (2003) 4971–4983.
[15] R.C. Edgar, MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced time
and space complexity, BMC, Bioinformatics 5 (2004) 113.
[16] E. Lauwers, Z. Erpapazoglou, R. Haguenauer-Tsapis, B. Andre, The ubiquitin code of
yeast permease trafficking, Trends Cell Biol. 20 (2010) 196–204.
[17] A. Gruhler, J.V. Olsen, S. Mohammed, P. Mortensen, N.J. Faergeman, M. Mann, O.N.
Jensen, Quantitative phosphoproteomics applied to the yeast pheromone
signaling pathway, Mol. Cell Proteomics. 4 (2005) 310–327.
[18] X. Li, S.A. Gerber, A.D. Rudner, S.A. Beausoleil, W. Haas, J. Villen, J.E. Elias, S.P. Gygi,
Large-scale phosphorylation analysis of alpha-factor-arrested Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, J. Proteome. Res. 6 (2007) 1190–1197.
[19] A. Chi, C. Huttenhower, L.Y. Geer, J.J. Coon, J.E. Syka, D.L. Bai, J. Shabanowitz, D.J.
Burke, O.G. Troyanskaya, D.F. Hunt, Analysis of phosphorylation sites on proteins
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae by electron transfer dissociation (ETD) mass
spectrometry, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104 (2007) 2193–2198.
[20] M.B. Smolka, C.P. Albuquerque, S.H. Chen, H. Zhou, Proteome-wide identification
of in vivo targets of DNA damage checkpoint kinases, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
104 (2007) 10364–10369.
[21] C.P. Albuquerque, M.B. Smolka, S.H. Payne, V. Bafna, J. Eng, H. Zhou, A
multidimensional chromatography technology for in-depth phosphoproteome
analysis, Mol. Cell Proteomics. 7 (2008) 1389–1396.
[22] A. Huber, B. Bodenmiller, A. Uotila, M. Stahl, S. Wanka, B. Gerrits, R. Aebersold, R.
Loewith, Characterization of the rapamycin-sensitive phosphoproteome reveals
that Sch9 is a central coordinator of protein synthesis, Genes Dev. 23 (2009)
1929–1943.
[23] A.L. Hitchcock, K. Auld, S.P. Gygi, P.A. Silver, A subset of membrane-associated
proteins is ubiquitinated in response to mutations in the endoplasmic
reticulum degradation machinery, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100 (2003)
12735–12740.
[24] J. Peng, D. Schwartz, J.E. Elias, C.C. Thoreen, D. Cheng, G. Marsischky, J. Roelofs, D.
Finley, S.P. Gygi, A proteomics approach to understanding protein ubiquitination,
Nat. Biotechnol. 21 (2003) 921–926.
[25] F. Gnad, L.M. de Godoy, J. Cox, N. Neuhauser, S. Ren, J.V. Olsen, M. Mann, Highaccuracy
identification and bioinformatic analysis of in vivo protein phosphorylation
sites in yeast, Proteomics. 9 (2009) 4642–4652.
[26] A. Krogh, B. Larsson, Heijne G. von, E.L. Sonnhammer, Predicting transmembrane
protein topology with a hidden Markov model: application to complete genomes,
J.Mol.Biol. 305 (2001) 567–580.
[27] S.J. Sammut, R.D. Finn, A. Bateman, Pfam 10 years on: 10, 000 families and still
growing, Brief. Bioinform. 9 (2008) 210–219.
[28] A.F. Roth, J. Wan, A.O. Bailey, B. Sun, J.A. Kuchar, W.N. Green, B.S. Phinney, J.R.
Yates III, N.G. Davis, Global analysis of protein palmitoylation in yeast, Cell 125
(2006) 1003–1013.
[29] H.W. Mewes, S. Dietmann, D. Frishman, R. Gregory, G. Mannhaupt, K.F. Mayer, M.
Munsterkotter, A. Ruepp, M. Spannagl, V. Stumpflen, T. Rattei, MIPS: analysis and
annotation of genome information in 2007, Nucleic Acids Res. 36 (2008)
D196–D201.
[30] P. Flicek, B.L. Aken, B. Ballester, K. Beal, E. Bragin, S. Brent, Y. Chen, P. Clapham, G.
Coates, S. Fairley, S. Fitzgerald, J. Fernandez-Banet, L. Gordon, S. Graf, S. Haider,
M. Hammond, K. Howe, A. Jenkinson, N. Johnson, A. Kahari, D. Keefe, S. Keenan,
R. Kinsella, F. Kokocinski, G. Koscielny, E. Kulesha, D. Lawson, I. Longden, T.
Massingham, W. McLaren, K. Megy, B. Overduin, B. Pritchard, D. Rios, M. Ruffier,
M. Schuster, G. Slater, D. Smedley, G. Spudich, Y.A. Tang, S. Trevanion, A. Vilella,
J. Vogel, S. White, S.P. Wilder, A. Zadissa, E. Birney, F. Cunningham, I. Dunham, R.
Durbin, X.M. Fernandez-Suarez, J. Herrero, T.J. Hubbard, A. Parker, G. Proctor, J.
Smith, S.M. Searle, Ensembl's 10th year, Nucleic Acids Res. 38 (2010)
D557–D562.
[31] M. Kapushesky, I. Emam, E. Holloway, P. Kurnosov, A. Zorin, J. Malone, G. Rustici, E.
Williams, H. Parkinson, A. Brazma, Gene expression atlas at the European
bioinformatics institute, Nucleic Acids Res. 38 (2010) D690–D698.
[32] K.P. Byrne, K.H. Wolfe, Visualizing syntenic relationships among the hemiascomycetes
with the Yeast Gene Order Browser, Nucleic Acids Res. 34 (2006)
D452–D455.
[33] K.H. Wolfe, D.C. Shields, Molecular evidence for an ancient duplication of the
entire yeast genome, Nature 387 (1997) 708–713.
[34] M. Kellis, B.W. Birren, E.S. Lander, Proof and evolutionary analysis of ancient
genome duplication in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Nature 428 (2004)
617–624.
[35] B. Mons, M. Ashburner, C. Chichester, E. van Mulligen, M. Weeber, J. den Dunnen,
G.J. van Ommen, M. Musen, M. Cockerill, H. Hermjakob, A. Mons, A. Packer, R.
Pacheco, S. Lewis, A. Berkeley, W. Melton, N. Barris, J. Wales, G. Meijssen, E.
Moeller, P.J. Roes, K. Borner, A. Bairoch, Calling on a million minds for community
annotation in WikiProteins, Genome Biol 9 (2008) R89-.
[36] A.R. Pico, T. Kelder, M.P. van Iersel, K. Hanspers, B.R. Conklin, C. Evelo,
WikiPathways: pathway editing for the people, PLoS.Biol. 6 (2008) e184-.
[37] J.W. Huss III, P. Lindenbaum, M. Martone, D. Roberts, A. Pizarro, F. Valafar, J.B.
Hogenesch, A.I. Su, The Gene Wiki: community intelligence applied to human
gene annotation, Nucleic Acids Res. 38 (2010) D633–D639.
[38] R. Barriot, J. Breckpot, B. Thienpont, S. Brohée, S. Van Vooren, B. Coessens, L.C.
Tranchevent, P. Van Loo, M. Gewillig, K. Devriendt, Y. Moreau, Collaboratively
charting the gene-to-phenotype network of human congenital heart defects,
Genome Med. 2 (2010) 16.
[39] L.B. Ellis, D. Kalumbi, The demise of public data on the web? Nat. Biotechnol. 16
(1998) 1323–1324.
[40] L.B. Ellis, D. Kalumbi, Financing a future for public biological data, Bioinformatics.
15 (1999) 717–722.
[41] Chandras Christina, Weaver Thomas, Zouberakis Michae, Smedley Damian,
Schughart Klaus, Rosenthal Nadia, Hancock John M, Kollias George, Schofield
Paul N, Aidinis Vasilis, Models for financial sustainability of biological databases
and resources, Databases 2009:bap017 (2009).
1912 S. Brohée et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1798 (2010) 1908–1912
