EngOpt 2008 - International Conference on Engineering Optimization 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 01 - 05 June 2008.  
 
 
 
 
THE CORPORATE NETWORK OPTIMALIZATION IN IMPLEMENTATION OF COMPUTER SUPPORTED 
COLLABORATIVE WORK 
 
Pawe ł Kobis 
 
Department of Management Information Systems  
Management Faculty  
Czestochowa University of Technology  
Al. Armii Krajowej 19B  
42-200 Częstochowa 
Poland 
e-mail: pawelk@zim.pcz.pl 

 
1. Abstract  
Nowadays more and more decisions and tasks undertook in companies are accomplished with the use of group work elements, where 
computer  networks  are  intensively  used.  The  packets  exchange  as  a  form  of  group  transmission  may  function  in  the  area  of  one 
institution as well as among all cooperating units, which in the case of big companies, concerns business partners and customers who 
use  corporate  portals  or  communicate  by  using  multimedia  technology  implements.  The  technology  which  facilitates  and  organizes 
the group work in computer systems is called Computer Supported Collaborative Work (in literature know as CSCW).   
The  use  of  modern  informatics  technology,  which  improves  information  exchange,  requires  a  specific  network  infrastructure.  The 
particular  elements  of  this  infrastructure  are:  link  throughput,  assurance  of  QoS  (Quality  of  Service),  adjustment  of  informatics 
infrastructure  to  group  packets  transmission  in TCP-IP  network  (IP Multicast). The  present  technological  level  of  local  networks  in 
big  companies  is  strongly  diversified.    Many  of  them  require  optimization  in  the  area  of  their  structure  and  server  software.  The 
computer  network  optimization  for  group  transmission  is  very  complicated  and  difficult.  It  requires  “s tage  approach ”,  for  which  a 
proper  implementation  model  is  needed.  This  model  allows  non-invasive  interference  in  information  exchange  structure  of  a 
company.  
This article shows model which enables optimization of local network topology regarding the use of CSCW in big companies. It was 
constructed on the basis of surveys conducted in the local network of Czestochowa University of Technology. This model is adjusted 
to the use of new solution in the field of multimedia communication known as teleimmersion.  
 
2. Keywords: multimedia, computer, optimization, collaborative work 
 
3. Introduction 
It  seems  to be  impossible  for most of businesses  to operate properly without use of computer  systems. They have been employed  in 
virtually all industries, starting from education, through production, civil engineering and commerce. Members of boards of directors 
in  contemporary  businesses  have  become  aware  of  the  fact  that  assets  of  their  competitiveness  might  depend  on  efficiency  of 
computers  within  their  companies  and  capability  of  multimedia  communication  system.  IT  systems  ensure  quick  response  to  ever-
changing  demands  and  expectations  from  the  market.  This  means  that  companies  must  constantly  keep  track  of  their  competitors’ 
steps in terms of use of computers for business needs. In many cases they must be in readiness for undertaking of particular measures 
in  order  to maintain  their  leading  role  as  compared  to  the  competitors. Having  access  to  cutting-edge  technologies might  be  a main 
factor which gives a business additional advantage over competitors  [1]. The proposed model highlights  the  structure of  IT network 
which ensures modern management in businesses. The described algorithm for procedure during reorganization of IT network makes 
its implementation possible.  
Ultimate  goal  for  creation  of  a  model  which  enables  implementation  of  collaborative  work  technologies  was  attempts  to  improve 
work organization and, in consequence, need for improved results. Systems of collaborative work have proved useful in practice, thus 
people making up a cooperative group achieve better results.  
 
4. Theoretical aspects of multimedia communication in business 
 
4.1  Multicast in multimedia applications 
Multimedia communication is characterized by a variety of types and forms of information, mutual interpenetration of areas of media 
use  as  well  as  possibilities  for  integration  of  methods  and  technologies.  Moreover,  multimedia  communication  requires  intelligent 
and flexible telecommunication networks, equipment and modern systems of data transfer and processing.  
General-use  application  of  various  multimedia  services,  including  multimedia  communication,  involves  ensuring  proper  quality  of 
information  sent  by  means  of  networks.  Application  of  multimedia  is  connected  with  different  requirements  for  bandwidth  and 
quality of transmission band (LAN or WAN networks) and bit rates.  
Due  to  simultaneous occurrence of different  types of  information during multimedia broadcast  (voice, graphics,  text, computer data, 
video etc.) the problem arises of mutual synchronisation of types of data sent simultaneously. Problem of synchronization of services 
in multimedia system is an essential factor which determines quality and usability of multimedia transmission.   
There  is a necessity of  total  synchronization of  services during use of multimedia  transmission. Examples  include videoconferences. 
Audio and video signals, combined with computer data being sent during applications sharing (e.g. desktops or whiteboards), should 
reach users simultaneously and without remarkable delays [2]. 

 
 
Synchronization of services is necessary in the following cases: 
 

- combination of services (e.g. synchronous broadcast of video and audio with comments in the form of text), 
- media conversion (exchange of voice into text and vice versa, e.g. in voice recognition systems), 
- cooperation of media (e.g. audio and video transmission) 

 
In  the  case  of  synchronization  errors  (e.g.  caused  by  reduction  in  available  bandwidth  as  a  result  of  clogged  network)  the 
functionality  of  some multimedia  applications  is  limited. The  best available  solution  is buffering  signals  that  leave  terminals, which 
gives possibility to retry the sequence of data later or temporary stop transmission.  
Rising  interest  and popularization  of multimedia  communication  systems  and  new  applications have  led  to  growing  requirements  in 
relation  to communication networks,  including  the Internet. The most essential parameters which characterize  transmission networks 
and  determine  quality  of  multimedia  services  include  transmission  rate  (bit  rate)  and  required  bandwidth  for  each  application  (see 
Tab. 1 and Tab. 2). 

Table 1.  Bit rates for selected multimedia services 

Services 

Interaction data 
Telephone services 
Interaction graphics 
Videoconferences 
Data (file transfers) 
Video (after compression) 
Video (TV quality) 
Video (HDTV) 
Source: 

Maximal bit rate 
Average bit rate 
[Mbit/s] 
[Mbit/s] 
0,1 
0,0005 
0,64 
0,064 
1 
0,064 
2 
0,4 
100 
1 
10 
2 
34 
20 
134 
100 
Zbigniew Hulicki, Systemy Komunikacji Multimedialnej, WFPT, Kraków, 1998, 

Table 2.  Required bandwidth for different multimedia information 

Media 

Voice 
Audio 
Non-coded text  
Coded text 
Vector graphics 
Bitmap  
(non-coded images) 
Video 

Quality 
minimal accepted 
hi-fi 
80 x 60 characters/page 
80 x 60 characters/page 
500 vector graphics lines 
resolution: 768 x 512, 256 colours, character: 8 
x 8 points 
30 Mbit/s 
Full video, full action (25/30 fps) 
Source: Zbigniew Hulicki, Systemy Komunikacji Multimedialnej, WFPT, Kraków, 1998, 

Minimal bandwith (file size) 
8 kbit/s 
88 kbit/s 
38,4 kbit/s 
18 kbit/page 
3 kbit 
384 kbit per image 

Other  requirements  imposed  on  multimedia  systems  concern  ensuring  adequate  level  of  quality  of  provided  services  (Quality  of 
Service  –  QoS)  (Table  3).  Traditional  information  n etworks  fulfil  these  requirements  only  partially.  ATM  network  (Asynchronous 
Transfer  Mode),  which  is  employed  in  the  case  of  e.g.  switching  of  Internet  broadband  connections  –  pe rfectly  meets  these 
requirements.  

Table 3.   QoS requirements for multimedia services 

QOS 

Voice 
Voice (HDTV) 
Video (compressed) 
Data (file transfer) 
Data (real-time data) 
Graphics 

Bit error ratio 

Maximal signal 
Maximal delay 
phase fluctuation 
[s] 
< 10-1 
10 
0,25 
10-2 
10 
0,25 
10-6 
1 
0,25 
0 
- 
1 
0 
- 
0,001 – 1 
10-4 
- 
1 
Source: Zbigniew Hulicki, Systemy Komunikacji Multimedialnej, WFPT, Kraków, 1998, 

Packet error ratio 

< 10-1 
10-3 
10-9 
0 
0 
10-9 

 
A solution to the problem of low connection bandwidth is application of multicasting. Nowadays, multicasting has become a leading-
edge  network  solution.  It  enables  multi-point  transmission  and  collection  of  data  in  packet  mode  to/from  unlimited  number  of 
recipients/senders  in  real  time.  It  uses  IP protocol  for multicasting  packets  transmission  (containing all  types of multimedia data) by 
means  of  available  network  types,  i.e.  LAN,  WAN,  complex  networks,  the  Internet.  Multicasting  technology,  also  termed  IP 
Multicast  (Internet Protocol Multicast),  enables  practical  realization  of  large-scale  services  such  as:  interactive  news  television  (e.g. 
Business TV),  live  transmissions of financial news or meetings of board of directors, transmission of  financial data  to any, unlimited 
number of users of news bulletins (e.g. stock exchange rates from all over the world). 

 
 
Mechanism of IP Multicast technology assumes existence of  ‘multicasting groups’ (being a fundamental c oncept in multicasting), i.e. 
a  group  of  computers which  simultaneously  use  an  application,  defined  (identified)  by  a  common  (multicasting)  class D  IP  address 
[3]. Each computer can be registered as a component of selected multicasting groups.  
 

 

 

Figure 1. Information transfer in unicast and multicast networks 
a)  unicast method 
b)  multicast method 
Source: own study 
 
Multicasting  is a  technology which enables organization of multi-location videoconferencing via  Internet  (MBONE) as well as  local 
and  corporate  Ethernet  networks.  Videoconferencing  belongs  to  a  subset  of  multicasting  applications  [4].  Through  its  unique  data 
transmission  method  (sending  only  one  copy  of  information  independently  of  a  number  of  recipients),  multicasting  enables  saving 
available transmission band and network bandwidth and also causes reduction in load on servers (saving computing power) and more 
efficient  use  of  available  network  resources  (Fig.  1).  This  universal  technology  is  used,  apart  from  the  two  abovementioned 
applications  using  total  multimedia  transmission,  for  data  transfer  to  multiple-recipients.  Multicasting  has  been  widely  applied  in 
business  (e.g.  software  updates  in  many  business  branches,  transmission  of  current  data  to  many  computers,  transmission  of 
multimedia  files  in  the  form  of MP3, MPEG  video  clips  etc.). Group  transmission  is  also  used  as  support  for  network  technologies 
used  for  Internet  needs  e.g.  storage,  updating  and  transmission  of  content  at  WWW  webpages  (web-cashing),  Internet  directories, 
transfer  and  automated  software  updates,  discussion  boards,  multi-person  interactive  chat,  virtual  worlds  or  cities,  virtual  reality, 
multiplayer games and others. 
 
4.2  Systems of collaborative work 
Collaborative work  is a  term which denotes cooperation of a number, geographically scattered or staying within one room, of people 
who  make  use  of  facilities  offered  by  their  work  environment  supported  by  technology.  The  support  consists  in  availability  of 
transfer  and  share  of  documents, mechanisms  for  planning  and  task  assignment,  control over  progress  in  task  execution,  tracking  of 
time and costs of the performed works.  
The purpose of implementation of rules and solutions for collaborative work might be [5]: 
• 
the need for task management and control over time and costs of realization of the tasks, 
• 
systematization and registration of document flow, 
• 
improvement in information flow between members of organizations, 
• 
need  for  integration  of  flow  of  all  the  forms  of  documents:  faxes,  letters,  e-mails,  paper  documents  which  come  from 
WWW pages or other sources. 
Mechanisms  of  collaborative  work  enable  implementation  of  an  idea  of  remote  work,  central management  and  control  over  project 
teams, regular protection of their results, systematized registration and making use of team members ’  knowledge. Collaborative work 
forces initiatives from team members, increased sense of duty and efficient time management. It can also be argued that collaborative 
work is an element of business knowledge management strategies [6].  
Data  being  in  information  circulation  in  businesses  are  mainly  scattered  around  a  variety  of  physical  locations  (servers  and 
workstations)  and  written  in  many  formats.  This  situation  is  caused  by  the  fact  that  software  from  many  manufacturers  has  been 
installed in different organizational units. Such a procedure has its effect in informational chaos which consists in lack of opportunity 
of  unconstrained  data  exchange  between  each  department  and  between  various  levels  in  a  corporate  ladder.  Incompatibility  of  file 
formats  impedes  their  processing  by  several  applications.  There  are  often  copies  of  the  same  information  in  computer  networks, 
which additionally impedes proper and quick decision-making.  
 
 
5  Model of implementation of IT infrastructure for support of multicasting 
Nowadays all bigger businesses have  their own, developed corporate networks. These networks are more or  less adapted  to efficient 
data exchange. They have  gradually developed  from  smaller networks  to  their present  state. Their  technological advancement  (from 

 
 
the standpoint of modern equipment being a part of it) is varied and a far cry from perfect. Therefore there is a need for adaptation of 
the existing teleinformation infrastructure to efficient and flexible data exchange. 
In  order  not  to  cause  work  disorganization  in  businesses  during  implementation  of  new  information  solutions,  a  model  presenting 
gradual  transformation of a network  into  the  state which enables use of collaborative work  (Fig. 2) was developed. Presented model 
is universal and is employed both in businesses with one location or having departments geographically separated from each other.  
 
 

 
Figure 2. General model of IT system in businesses during implementation of group systems of data exchange 
Source: own study 

 

 
Data exchange during  implementation requires creation of specific mechanisms  for data  transformation (Fig. 3). The most  important 
component  of  the  structure  presented  in  Fig.  3  is  expert  system,  responsible  for  data  selection  in  terms  of  quality,  format  and 
adequacy.  Depending  on  a  decision  by  expert  system,  data  are  sent  to  transformation  mechanisms  or  they  are  rejected  as  useless. 
Detailed tasks of the module are to be described in further part of this work.  
Implementation  of  the model which  presents  exchange  of  information  in  local  network  connected  to  the  Internet  is  possible  only  in 
the case of adaptation of  the network  to  interactive  transmission  in group  technology. Process of network adaptation depends mainly 
on  its  initial  state.  It  can be  carried  out  at  three  levels:  network  infrastructure,  software  for  network management  and  servers within 
Intranet  networks.  Selection  of  a  level  depends  on which  part  of  infrastructure  requires  modernization.  Extreme  case  appears  when 
modernization takes place at all the levels. Fig. 4 presents next stages of infrastructure modernization in the form of an algorithm.  
 
First  step  is  recognition  of  the  existing  network  infrastructure  in  an  organization.  This  enables  selection  of  proper  level  of  network 
modernization.  This  process  is  performed  together  with  network  compatibility  test  in  terms  of  usefulness  for  IP  Multicast 
transmission.  Lack  of  compatibility  forces  exchange  of  data  exchange  integrators  (routers,  switches,  gatekeepers).  Another  step  is 
integrator  cooperation  test,  which,  if  successfully  completed,  enables  initiation  of  procedures  of  application  server  creation. 
Application servers store and make available applications used within a network, simplifying the process of management. Placing all 
applications in one location enables administrators to update them  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Figure 3. Data transformation during implementation of a new information infrastructure 
Source: own study 

 
and  to  control  access  to  them.  Server  can  make  an  application  available  to  a  user  or  a  part  of  the  processing  performed  by  the 
application can be executed on the server [7]. Positive results of application server operation tests enable next components of network 
infrastructure  to  be  built,  i.e.:  data  transformation  module,  Knowledge  Database,  corporate  portal.  Transformation  module  is 
responsible  for  proper  transformation  and  adaptation  of  system  data  to  a  new  infrastructure.  Information  from  other  systems  should 
be refined, i.e. information value should be increased. There are two types of refinement [8]: 
• 
physical:  conversion  of  information  from  one  carrier  to  another,  conversion  from  one  media  to  another  e.g.  written  text, 
spoken text, cartoon or scanned image, video sequences, digital images in the form of raster or vector graphics.  
logic: assignment of information, standardization of data, aggregation, disaggregation, redundancy reduction, integration of 
information sets for selection of most useful information and in order to obtain information synergy effect.  

• 

 
Knowledge database serves as a platform which enables quick access to information from each point (computer) within the company 
through  corporate  portal.  The  portal  also  makes  information  available  within  one,  intuitive  user  interface,  extending  the  scope  of 
automation for executed business processes over office  limits (site workers, partners, customers, suppliers)  –  through ensuring direct 
interaction with  selected  functionalities  served within  the  company.  It  also  improves  content management  –  through mechanisms  of 
personalization,  categorization,  searching  and  information  circulation management  –  through work  flow  mechanisms  and  document 
management. 
Phase  of  testing  of  integrity  of  the  abovementioned  modules  is  preceded  by  a  process  of  implementation  of  a  new  information 
infrastructure ready for implementation of collaborative work systems.  
 

 
 

 
Figure 4. Algorithm of network transformation into a form which enables use of IP Multicast 
Source: own study 

 

 
 
6 
Summary 
Necessity of  transformation  in areas of  information exchange  in bigger businesses has become a determinant of competitiveness of a 
company  in  domestic  and  international markets. Despite mangers’  awareness  in  terms  of  information  exch ange  in  businesses, many 
of them do not make use of full potential brought by new technologies. Modern multimedia systems, which support data exchange in 
businesses, contain information resources collected in a particular way, process them and deliver to particular units in order to make a 
decision.  Creation  of  proper  information  resources  management  within  a  company  becomes  easier  after  proper  preparation  of 
information structure.  
 

The analysis was conducted according to the assumptions of research project nr N N115 134334 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7  References 
 
1.  A.  Gunasekaran,  P.E.D.  Love,  Current  and  future  directions  of  multimedia  technology  in  business,  International  Journal  of 
Information Management 19 (1999); 
2.  Kobis Paweł, Responsibility and Threats Connected wit h Modern Technologies Implementation, TRANSCOM 2003. 5-th 
European Conference of Young Research and Science Workers in Transport and Telecommunications. Section 3. Information 
Technologies Communication Systems and their Control, ns.53-56, śilina, 2003 
3.  Kiełtyka L., Kobis P., Nowe technologie przesyłania  danych w przedsiębiorstwie, VIII Międzynarodowa Konferencja Naukowa 
nt.  „Restrukturyzacja a procesy rozwoju i kreowania  wartości przedsiębiorstw”, Szwecja-Dania 2002. 
4.  Kiełtyka  Leszek,  The  Era  of  Virtual  Multicasting  Ne tworks,  W:Proceedings  of  the  IADIS  International  Conference  e-Society 
2003. Vol.II. , s.1018, Lisbon, Portugal, 2003 
5.  URL: http://aid.biznesnet.pl 
6.  Kobis Paweł, Technologie multimedialne wspieraj ące wymianę  informacji w przedsiębiorstwach, W:Zarządzanie przep ływem  i 
ochroną informacji. Pod red. Mirosława Kwieci ńskiego. s.40-46 Wyd.Krak.Szk.WyŜ. Kraków 2007 
7.  URL: http://www.i-slownik.pl/1,1292,serwer,aplikacji.html 
8.  Pańkowska, M.: Zarządzanie zasobami informatycznymi, Wyd. Difin, Warszawa, 2001 

