This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  
 
© IEEE Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained 
for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this 
material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale 
or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in 
other works. 

 

AirHopper: Bridging the Air-Gap between Isolated 
Networks and Mobile Phones using Radio Frequencies 
 
 
3
, Assaf Kachlon
 

, Yuval Elovici

, Gabi Kedma

2

 

Mordechai Guri

1

*4

 

 

Department of Information Systems Engineering, Ben-Gurion 
University 
*Telekom Innovation Laboratories at Ben-Gurion University 

Abstract 
Information  is  the  most  critical  asset  of  modern  organizations,  and 
accordingly  coveted by  adversaries. When highly  sensitive data  is  involved, 
an  organization  may  resort  to  air-gap  isolation,  in  which  there  is  no 
networking  connection  between  the  inner  network  and  the  external  world. 
While  infiltrating  an  air-gapped  network  has  been  proven  feasible  in  recent 
years  (e.g.,  Stuxnet),  data  exfiltration  from  an  air-gapped  network  is  still 
considered  to  be  one  of  the most  challenging  phases  of  an  advanced  cyber-
attack.  
In  this  paper  we  present  "AirHopper",  a  bifurcated  malware  that  bridges 
the  air-gap between  an  isolated network  and nearby  infected mobile phones 
using  FM  signals.  While  it  is  known  that  software  can  intentionally  create 
radio  emissions  from  a  video  display  unit,  this  is  the  first  time  that  mobile 
phones  are  considered  in  an  attack  model  as  the  intended  receivers  of 
maliciously  crafted  radio  signals.  We  examine  the  attack  model  and  its 
limitations,  and  discuss  implementation  considerations  such  as  stealth  and 
modulation methods.  Finally,  we  evaluate AirHopper  and  demonstrate  how 
textual  and binary data  can be  exfiltrated  from  physically  isolated  computer 
to mobile phones at a distance of 1-7 meters, with effective bandwidth of 13-
60 Bps (Bytes per second).  

                                                           
1  gurim@post.bgu.ac.il 
2  gabik@post.bgu.ac.il 
3  assafka@post.bgu.ac.il 
4  elovici@bgu.ac.il 
 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
1.  Introduction 
 

Modern organizations rely on their computer networks to deliver all kinds 
of  information.  Consequently,  such  networks  are  a  lucrative  target  for 
malicious  adversaries.  Defending  a  network  is  quite  a  complicated  task, 
involving  host-level  protection,  network-level  protection,  secured  gateways 
and  routers,  and  so  on.  However,  as  long  as  the  local  area  network  has  a 
connection with  the outer world  (e.g.,  the  Internet),  irrespective of  the  level 
of protection, an innovative and persistent attacker will eventually find a way 
to breach the network, to eavesdrop, and to transmit sensitive data outward. 
Accordingly, when a network is used to deliver highly sensitive data, or to 
connect  computers  that  store  or  process  such  data,  the  so  called  'air  gap' 
approach  is  often  applied.  In  an  air-gapped  network,  there  is  no  physical 
networking  connection  (wired  or  wireless)  with  the  external  world,  either 
directly  or  indirectly  through  another,  less  secure  network.  Nevertheless, 
employees  may  carry  their  mobile  phones  around  the  organization's 
workplace, possibly within the vicinity of a classified computer which is part 
of  an  air-gapped  network.  This  may  occur  despite  reasonable  security 
procedures, and does not require malicious intent on the employee's part.  
This scenario becomes relevant and increasingly common since a growing 
portion of modern mobile phones are being marketed with FM radio receivers 
[1]  [2]  [3].  With  appropriate  software,  compatible  radio  signals  can  be 
produced by a compromised computer, utilizing the electromagnetic radiation 
associated with the video display adapter. This combination, of a transmitter 
with a widely used mobile receiver, creates a potential covert channel that is 
not being monitored by ordinary security instrumentation. 
In  this paper we show how mobile phones with FM receivers can be used 
to  collect  emanating  radio  signals,  modulated  with  sensitive  information, 
from  a  compromised  computer.  Although  the  attack  model  is  somewhat 
complicated,  it  is not beyond  the capabilities of a  skilled persistent attacker. 
In reward for his or her effort,  the attacker may collect valuable  information 
from air-gapped networks. 
 
1.1   FM Receiver in Mobile Phones 
 

FM  radio  receivers  in mobile  phones,  first  introduced  around  1998,  have 
grown in popularity with the emergence of modern smartphones. Overriding 
early  hesitations, most major  carriers  and manufacturers  are  integrating  FM 
receivers in  their products. Microsoft has endorsed FM, announcing support 
in an update to Windows Phone 8 [4]. Of the nearly 700 million phones sold 
by  Nokia  in  2012  and  2013,  the  two  bestselling  models  (Lumia  520  and 
Lumia 920) now support FM radio. In the Android market, over 450 models 
support  FM  radio  [1]  [2].  FM  receivers  are  also  integrated  in  many  feature 
phones  (low-end  mobile  phones)  and  media  players  (e.g.,  iPod  nano). 

2 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
Additionally,  legislative  efforts  have  been  made  in  the  US  to  enforce 
integration of FM receivers in mobile phones, for use in emergency situations 
[5] . 
 

2.  Attack Model 
 

The attack model posits that hostile code can be installed and run (a) on the 
targeted  network,  consisting  of  one  computer  or  more  and  (b)  on  mobile 
devices that may reside in the vicinity of the targeted system. With the current 
popularity  of  'Bring  Your  Own  Device'  (BYOD),  mobile  phones  are  often 
carried into and out of the physical perimeter of the organization. 
The attack  is composed of  four main  steps:  (1)  inserting hostile code  into 
the  target  system;  (2)  infecting  mobile  phones  with  hostile  code;  (3) 
establishing a Command and Control (C&C) channel with the mobile phone; 
(4)  detecting  emanated  signals  and  transmitting  them  back  to  the  attacker 
(Figure 1). 
 
 

 
Figure 1: Demonstration of AirHopper. The targeted computer (A) emanates 
radio signals that are picked up by a mobile phone (B).  In this 
demonstration, the distance between (A) and (B) is 4 meters. 

 
 

3 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
 
2.1   Infecting the Target Machine 
 

Once the air gap barrier is breached, hostile code can infect systems within 
the targeted network. Such breaches are possible, as demonstrated by Stuxnet 
[6] [7] and Agent.btz [8]. It would be reasonable to assume that most similar 
cases  are  unpublished.    Possible  attack  vectors  are  (a)  through  removable 
media or (b) through outsourced software or hardware components. Once the 
hostile code runs on one node of the target network, it may propagate further 
and infect other nodes. 
 
2.2   Infecting the Mobile Phone 
 

Regarding mobile phones, the array of attack vectors is considerably wider 
than  those  target  computers  offer  since  these  devices  are  connected  to  the 
outer world through a host of interfaces, such as cellular networks, Bluetooth, 
Wi-Fi, and physical connections to other devices. Most probably, the attacker 
would  try  to  locate  and  infect  mobile  phones  of  those  employees  in  the 
targeted organization, who are most likely to work in the vicinity of targeted 
computers. Similar to the early stage of an Advanced Persistent Threat (APT), 
this step may utilize data mining, social networks, phishing and similar social 
engineering methods. The mobile phone can be  infected via  the  Internet,  by 
visiting  contaminated  sites,  by  email  messages  with  malicious  attachments, 
or  by  installing  malicious  applications.  Other  infection  routes  include 
physical access, SMS vulnerabilities  [9], and  interference with  the signaling 
interface [10]. 
 
2.3   Establishing the C&C Channel 
 

After  infecting  the  mobile  phone,  the  attacker  should  establish  a  C&C 
channel. This can be done via the Internet (data or Wi-Fi), or by SMS, where 
messages  can  be  sent  and  received  without  alerting  the  user.  If  suitable 
connectivity  with  the  attacker  is  limited  or  discontinuous,  the  malicious 
program  that  runs  on  the  mobile  phone  may  store  the  accumulated 
information, and  send  it back  to  the attacker when  the desired  connection  is 
available. 
 
2.4   Radio Monitoring 
 

The  mobile  phone  should  monitor  the  radio  channel  in  order  to  detect 
emanated  information. When  an  emanated  broadcast  is  detected,  the  device 
decodes it. Monitoring may be: (1) continuous as long as the mobile phone is 
active; (2) temporal, based on the work schedule of the user; (3) spatial, based 
on  the  current  location  of  the  user,  as  indicated  by  GPS,  wireless  network 

4 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
cells, or otherwise; or (4) initiated upon receiving a remote command through 
the C&C channel. 
 
3.  Background 
 

Generating  radio  signals  from  video  card  has  been  discussed  in  several 
works and technical papers [11] [12] [13] [14]. The main parameter required 
for transmission calculation is the pixel clock. The pixel clock is measured in 
MHz,  and  it  represents  the  frequency  at which  the  pixels  are  transmitted  to 
screen such that a full frame of pixels fits within one refresh cycle. It can be 
calculated with a simple multiplication: 
 

(Hpixel + Hsync )(Vpixel + Vsync)(Rr) = PC 

 
where  Hpixel   and  Vpixel   are  vertical  and  horizontal  resolution  (e.g.,  1024 
and 768) settings, Vsync , Hsync  are the vertical and horizontal synchronization 
length (in pixels) , Rr is the refresh rate (e.g., 60Hz) and PC is the pixel clock. 
These parameters are determined by the display standard. Generally, in both 
analog  and  digital  standards,  pixels  timing  is  mainly  determined  by  the 
display resolution and refresh rates. 
Given  the  graphic  card  standards,  it  is  possible  to  construct  an  image 
pattern  that  while  being  sent  to  the  display  will  generate  a  carrier  wave 
modulated with a data signal. The first option is to directly affect the voltage 
of  the  signal  by  changing  pixel  colors.  Amplitude  modulation  (AM)  is  the 
obvious choice for data transmission of this type. By gradually changing the 
shade of the pixels over a fixed carrier the amplitude of the carrier signal can 
be  changed.  Previous  research  has  demonstrated  intentional  generation  of 
modulated radio signals using monitors and display adapters  [15] [12] [14]  . 
The purpose of our research is to transmit FM signals which will be received 
and  interpreted  by mobile  phone  FM  receiver.  FM  signals  are  generated  by 
constructing an image of alternating sequences of black and white pixels that 
reflect  the  required  carrier  frequency modulation.  In  FM modulation, white 
and black pixels  are used  to  generate  fixed, maximal  amplitude  for  stronger 
signal generation.  
 
4.  Implementation 
 

For  the  purpose  of  testing  and  evaluating  the  realistic  applicability  of  the 
attack, we developed  the "AirHopper" malware.  In  this  section, we describe 
the  implementation  of  the  malware's  two  components;  a  transmitter 
implemented for the PC and a receiver implemented for the mobile phone.  
Reception  of  the  generated  signals  with  a  mobile  phone's  FM  receiver 
poses  new  challenges  and  opportunities.  One  of  the  main  challenges  is  the 
fact that FM-receiver chips in mobile phones are decoding the FM signals in 

5 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
DSP  (Digital  Signal  Processing)  chips  and  then  generating  audio  signals. 
Consequently,  the  mobile  phone's  operating  system  has  access  only  to  the 
generated  audio  output  (layer  2,  in  Figure  2)  and  not  to  carrier  waves 
themselves. Hence,  in order  to  send digital  information  to  receiver, data has 
to be modulated using audio tones (layer 3, in Figure 2). In addition, the audio 
frequencies  used  in  modulations  were  selected  given  the  FM  receiver 
characteristics and limitations, as mentioned in section 4.2.  
 
 

Figure 2: AirHopper modulation layers 

 

 
4.1   FM Audio Signal Generation 
 

In  this  section  we  describe  the  algorithm  used  by  AirHopper   to  generate 
pixels pattern (image) that cause emission of specific FM audio tone.  For the 
purpose  of  the  audio  modulation  algorithm,  we  denote  𝐹𝑐   to  be  the  carrier 
frequency  which  the  FM  receiver  must  be  tuned  to  in  order  to  receive  the 
transmission (e.g. 90 MHz). This value is limited to be twice the pixel clock 
at  most  [15].  However,  since  the  signal  generated  by  the  display  adapter  is 
nearly  square  (alternating  between  "black"  and  "white"  pixels),  it  generates 
strong harmonics which may be used to ignore this limitation and transmit on 
a frequency higher than twice the pixel clock with some loss of signal quality 
[15]. 
𝐹𝑑  denotes the data frequency (audio tone) to be modulated over the carrier. 
𝑃𝑐  denotes the value of the pixel clock previously described and 𝐻𝑝 , 𝑉𝑝  are the 
horizontal and vertical resolution parameters, plus the front and back porches 
which are periods of time in which no displayed pixel data is sent. This time 
period is used to allow for a CRT monitor time to retract its beam back to the 
top at the end of a frame and to the left at the end of a line. These are left over 
in the standard for compatibility with CRT display technology.   
The  modulation  process  outlined  by  the  following  algorithm  (Algorithm 
1),  is  loosely  based  on  the  code  from  Tempest  for  Eliza  [14].  A  modified 
variant was implemented in order to improve quality of the transmitted signal.  
Intuitively, the above algorithm decides which pixel to color by emulating 
the  carrier  frequency's  peaks.  The  resulting  image  is  made  of  alternating 
horizontal  "stripes"  consisting  of  either  a  black  and white  pixel  pattern  that 

6 
 

FM signals  (87.5-108MHz)Audio (~0-44KHz)Data (text/binary)1Layer 2Layer 3Layer Modulations(AirHopperPC)Demodulations(AirHopperMobile)FM chip/DSPThis is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
matches  the  carrier  frequency  or  an  empty  black  stripe.  The  inner  loop 
calculates the pattern that emulates the carrier frequency 𝐹𝑐 . The width of the 
stripes, and consequently the number of stripes is determined by the value of 
𝐹𝑑  and calculated in the outer loop. Simply put, this periodic change in stripes 
modulates the audio tone 𝐹𝑑 . 
Given  a  pixel  map,  the  following  approximate  formula  can  be  used  to 
determine the generated signal frequency. 
 

(𝑌1 − 𝑌0)

(𝐻𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙 + 𝐻𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑐 )
𝑃𝑐

≈

1
𝐹𝑑

 

 
𝑌0  and 𝑌1  are  the vertical pixel coordinates of  two consecutive pixel  rows 
that  have  the  same  pixel  pattern.  This  formula  uses  the  video  card  timing 
parameters to approximately calculate the period time of the data signal.  
                             
01 k ← 2 * Fd / PC , t ← 0 
02 all pixels ← BLACK 
03   For i ← 0 to Vp 
04     IF floor(t*k)is odd  
05       For j ← 0 to Hp 
06         IF floor(t*k) is odd  
07           pixel[j][i] ← WHITE 
08         t←t+1 
09     Else 
10       t←t+Hp 
 
Algorithm 1: Pixel map for signal tone (Fd) modulation 

            

 

 
4.2   AirHopper Transmitter - Data Modulation over Audio 
 

We  used  two  techniques  to  modulate  digital  information  over  the  audio 
signals,  Audio  Frequency-Shift  Keying  (A-FSK)  and  Dual-Tone  Multiple-
Frequency  (DTMF).  Our  evaluation  shows  that  A-FSK  is  less  sensitive  to 
interferences and can transmit to longer distances compared to DTMF. DTMF 
on  the  other  hand,  is  more  efficient  in  terms  of  bandwidth  and  binary  data 
transmissions.  
With both techniques, the data was modulated over audio frequencies. Our 
experiments  show  that  frequencies  lower  than  600Hz  suffered  from 
significant interference, and extensive reception testing showed that reception 
distance  started  to  diminish  significantly  for  signal  frequencies  greater  than 
11 kHz. We limited the transmission range accordingly in both methods. 
 

7 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
4.2.1  A-FSK.  With  this  data  modulation  method  over  audio  each  letter  or 
character was keyed with different audio frequency. Technically, this is done 
by  showing  an  image  on  the  entire  screen  area  to  generate  a  single,  unique 
signal  frequency,  and  keeping  the  image  static  for  a  short  time  span.  The 
receiver  is  then  responsible  for  sampling  the  demodulated  audio  signal  and 
decoding the data. Using less than 40 distinct audio frequencies, we were able 
to encode simple textual data – both alphabetical and numerical. This method 
is  very  effective  for  transmitting  short  textual  massages  such  as  identifiers, 
key-stroking,  keep-alive  messages  and  notifications.  During  our  extensive 
testing this method proved to be the most resilient to interference and had the 
greatest  reception  range  and  the best  accurate data  recovery  rate.  Following 
these  positive  results,  we  attempted  modulating  arbitrary  binary  data  using 
256 different audio tones, resulting in frequency spacing of 11000/256≈40Hz 
per  character.  Our  tests  resulted  in  higher  error  ratio  and  ambiguous 
demodulations  at  the  decoder  side.  The  primary  reason  is  that  the  digital 
signal  processing  (DSP)  component  in  FM  receivers  utilizes  adaptive  noise 
filtering,  equalization  and  other  techniques,  to  enhance  the  listening 
experience. These methods are altering adjacent audio  frequencies, unifying 
them or filtering  them as noise. As a  result of the above, we adapted DTMF 
modulation to encode binary data. 
 
4.2.2.  DTMF(16x16).  In  the  DTMF  schema,  a  combination  of  two  tones 
represents a byte of data. This is similar to using two hexadecimal digits. The 
tones  were  selected  from  a  table  of  16x16  frequency  pairs  enabling  256 
different  combinations.  The  table's  columns  are  frequencies  in  the  600Hz-
5000Hz  range,  and  the  table's  rows  are  frequencies  in  the  6000Hz-10400Hz 
range. E.g., a byte containing data equivalent to the value 134 is represented 
by a tone in the eighth row (⌊134/16⌋=8) and a tone in the sixth column (134 
mod 16=6), played simultaneously. The transmission of two modulated audio 
signals  is done by  logically splitting  the screen  into  two halves,  transmitting 
a  different  image  to  each  half.  This  resulted  in  some  loss  of  range  and 
reception quality, but the tradeoff was a much higher data transfer rate.  
 
4.3   AirHopper Receiver - Data Demodulation from Audio 
 

An essential part of  the malicious code on  the mobile phone  is  the ability 
to record the received FM audio and decode the data or forward the recording 
to the attacker. The important implementation details are described in the next 
sections. 
 
4.3.1  Android  FM  audio  output  redirection.  In  order  to  process  the  FM 
audio, its output has to be recorded or saved. Recording output from the FM 
radio  was  undocumented  in  Android  APIs  up  to  API18  (Android  4.3,  Jelly 
Bean  MR2).  By  disassembling 
the  MediaRecorder 
class 
file 
(MediaRecorder$AudioSource.smali)  from  the  Android  framework,  we 

8 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
found how  to enable FM  radio  recording by using AudioRecord object with 
audioSource=8 and sampleRateInHz=44100 [16]. 
 
4.3.2  Audio  sampling.  Modern  mobile  phones  support  a  maximum  audio 
capture sampling rate of 44.1 KHz. The Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem 
states  that  perfect  reconstruction  of  a  signal  is  possible,  when  the  sampling 
frequency  is  greater  than  twice  the maximum  frequency  of  the  signal  being 
sampled. Consequently, sampling can be accomplished at 20 KHz maximum 
frequency. 20 KHz is the highest frequency generally audible by humans, thus 
making 44.1 KHz the logical choice for most audio material. Using Android’s 
recording API, the radio signals were recorded and stored in a memory buffer, 
using Pulse-Code Modulation (PCM) format at 16 bit per sample. 
 
4.3.3 Signal processing. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) transforms the buffer 
from the time domain to the frequency domain. Since there are 1024 samples 
per  chunk,  we  generate  a  discrete  function  that  depicts  the  spectrum  of  the 
recorded  signal,  where  the  amplitude  value  of  each  index  represents  a 
frequency range of 44100/1024≈43Hz. Depending on the modulation method 
(A-FSK or DTMF)  -  the spectrum  is expected to contain one or  two distinct 
amplitudes. In DTMF modulation, there should be one frequency index with 
distinctively  high  amplitude,  in  each  half  of  the  spectrum  range  (600Hz -
5000Hz  and 6000Hz-10400Hz). The  frequency  index pair  is  then  compared 
to the DTMF frequency table to recover the transmitted byte.  
 
4.3.4 Bypassing headphone requirement. Some phone models require that 
headphones should be connected to enable the user to turn on the radio. This 
is necessary since the headphone cable is being used as an antenna for the FM 
receiver  chip. Without  an  antenna,  the  reception  quality  of  the  FM  receiver 
will  be  poor. While  it  is  technically  possible  to  receive  a  signal  without  an 
antenna,  the  headphone  cable  requirement  ensures  a  good  user  experience. 
We  found  that  this  limitation  is  implemented  by  the  vendor  at  the  software 
level, and that it can be bypassed. We disassembled the Samsung Galaxy S3 
framework  file  (/system/framework/framework2.odx)  using  baksmali  [17] 
disassembler.  In  the  service  file  (FMRadioService),  the mIsHeadsetPlugged 
variable  was  initialized  to  'true',  and  the  headphone  check  methods 
("access$302), was modified to return  'true'. This  tricks the application level 
headphone checks to pass, regardless of the true condition. 
 
4.4   Transmission Protocol 
 

AirHopper  employed  two modes of  transmissions;  raw  and  structured.  In 
raw  transmissions,  the  data  stream  is  taken  from  an  array  of  bytes  and 
transmitted sequentially. In case of signal loss or interruptions, the receiver is 
unaware  of  it.  Streaming  the  raw  data  sequentially  is  suitable  for  textual 
information  such  as  key-logging  and  text  files  or  for  short  signaling  and 

9 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
notifications  messages.  Such  information  is  valuable  even  when  some 
characters are missing. The structured protocol is appropriate for binary data 
transmissions when it is important to identify errors and know which part of 
the file or data was actually received. The transmission headers include an (1) 
initial  synchronization pulse,  (2)  the  sequence number of  the packet,  (3)  the 
size of the packet, (4) the data itself, and (5) a checksum. AirHopper receiver 
can easily detect which protocol  is used (raw of structured) by searching for 
synchronization pulse. 
 
5.  Hiding 
 

In  order  to  remain  hidden  while  transmitting,  AirHopper  uses  various 
techniques for hiding both visual aspects and transmitted signal. 
 
5.1   Visual Hiding 
 

This  section  explains  how  to  eliminate  the  visual  appearance  of  the 
transmitted  data  on  a  computer  screen.  Three  of  the  suggested  techniques 
utilize  standardized  means  of  communication  with  an  attached  monitor. 
HDMI,  DVI  and  VGA  monitors  and  VDUs  implement  the  Display  Data 
Channel (DDC) family of protocols.  
Display  Data  Channel  Command  Interface  (DDC/CI) 
is  a 
itself 
bidirectional communication protocol between computer monitor and VDU. 
Monitor Control Command Set  (MCCS)  is a known standard, developed by 
Video  Electronics  Standards  Association  (VESA),  that  specifics  the  set  of 
commands  for  controlling  monitors  over  the  DDC/CI  communication 
protocol. 
 
5.1.1 Transmitting when monitor is off. With DDC/CI, the transmitter can 
determine  that  a  monitor  is  off,  and  only  then  start  the  transmissions.  A 
monitor goes off  as  a  result of power-saving  settings, when  the  computer  is 
idle for predefined period. As soon as the transmitter detects that the monitor 
is  back  on,  it  stops  the  transmissions.  Note  that  since  the  VDU  constantly 
generates  signals,  and  the  monitor  cable  is  used  only  as  an  antenna,  the 
transmission is just as effective with the monitor turned off. Technically, the 
monitor  status  is  determined  by  checking  Power  Control  Status  (address 
0xe1)  of DDC/CI.  The  transmitter  continuously  samples  this  status,  polling 
ioctl (I/O control) in a dedicated thread. 0 indicates that the screen is powered 
off. 
 
 
5.1.2  Turning  the  monitor  off.  Using  DDC/CI,  the  transmission  code  can 
also  send a command  to  intentionally  turn off  the monitor. This method can 
be used in the same manner as a screen-saver; the code monitors the computer 

10 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
for  user  activity  and waits  for  a  period  of  idle  time.  In  case  o f  inactivity,  it 
will turn off the monitor and start data transmissions until a user activity, such 
as  a  mouse  movement  or  keyboard  press,  is  detected.  It  will  then  stop 
transmitting and turn the monitor back on, in the same way a normal screen -
saver  or  power  saving  feature  would  behave.  Like  the  previous  method, 
turning the monitor on/off is done by writing 1 or 0 to 0xe1, using ioctl. 
 
5.1.3 Switching  the monitor  to a different computer. Another method  for 
hiding  the  displayed  image  from  users  utilizes  the  popular Keyboard Video 
Mouse  (KVM)  switch.  This  switch  is  a  device  that  allows  desktop  basic 
peripherals,  keyboard  mouse  and  monitor,  to  be  shared  between  multiple 
computers.  By  clicking  a  button  on  the  switch  or  using  a  keyboard  key 
combination  the  user  switches  between  desktops.  Since  this  allows  the  user 
to comfortably use multiple desktops on one office desk, it is commonly used 
in organizations with air-gapped networks. Using DDC/CI, a transmitter can 
detect  when  the  KVM  switches  between  desktops  and  start/stop  the 
transmissions accordingly.  
 
5.1.1 Using  secondary display output. Another method  that we  tested was 
to force the VDU to transmit on a specific video output even though it did not 
detect  a  connected monitor. This  capability  can be useful when  a  computer, 
laptop  or  desktop,  has  multiple  display  outputs.  The  transmitting  code  can 
detect  which  video  output  is  currently  being  used  and  redirect  the 
transmission to an inactive output. Since in most cases only one display cable 
is connected, and transmitting without a display cable as an antenna requires 
close proximity to the receiver, this method is effective in cases when the user 
places his mobile phone on the desk right next to the laptop/desktop.  
Another scenario is when laptop/desktops are used in conference rooms with 
a  secondary  persistent  connection  to  a  projector.  The  projector  output  is 
turned  off  or  disconnected  most  of  the  time,  allowing  for  very  long 
transmission  periods with  nothing  suspicious  being  visible. Our  testing  also 
showed  that  the  long,  unshielded  cables  that  are  usually  used  to  connect  to 
projectors  are  also  ideal  for  transmission  quality  and  can  be  received  by 
phones in adjacent rooms. 
 
 
5.2   Signal Hiding 
 

Another  detection  risk  is  accidental  reception  of  the  transmitted  signal. 
Since  the  system  that  modulates  transmitted  data  uses  audible  tone 
frequencies,  tuning  a  regular  FM  receiver  to  the  carrier  frequency  used  for 
transmission, results in a noticeable, changing tone that may alert suspecting 
individuals.  In  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  such  an  accidental  detection,  we 
extended  the  phone’s  FM  reception  band  to  76  MHz  –  108  MHz  and  the 
transmission carrier frequency to 80MHz.  

11 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 

FM transmissions between 76 MHz to 87.5 MHz are only used in very few 
countries, such as Japan. Most FM receivers available elsewhere in the world 
do  not  allow  tuning  or  seeking  in  this  range.  We  found,  however,  that 
although the nonstandard range is actually supported by FM chips in mobile 
phones,  the upper software  layers disable  it. By  transmitting  in  the extended 
range, accidental detection can be avoided in most countries. On the receiving 
phone, we  enabled  reception of  the  extended  frequency  range by modifying 
the  Samsung  framework  utilizing  smali  [17]  disassembler.  Technically,  the 
framework  file  is  located  in  /system/framework.  We  changed  the  class 
FMRadioService  in  the  package  com.android.server  by  setting  the  value  of 
BAND_76000_108000_kHz  to  1. This modification  at  the OS  level  code  is 
unnoticeable  by  the  phone's  user.  Using  a  nonstandard  band  also  helps  to 
avoid collisions with local radio station broadcasts, and allows a wider range 
of  available  transmission  frequencies.  Another  modification  that  deters 
accidental  detection  involved  changing  the  phone's  frequency  seeking 
interval from the default 200 KHz to 50 KHz. This allows the transmitter and 
receiver code to fine-tune to carrier frequencies that many FM receivers will 
not allow for an ordinary user, hence avoiding accidental detection. 
 
6.  Evaluation 
 

In  this  section  we  evaluate  the  feasibility  and  the  effectiveness  of  the 
proposed data exfiltration method. The main efficiency measures include the 
emitted signal strength,  the effective broadcasting distance,  the transmission 
speed,  the  transmission  quality,  the  battery  consumption,  and  the  scanning 
time. The factors include the cable type, the presence of receiver antenna, the 
modulation method (A-FSK/DTMF), the carrier frequency, the signal delay, 
the  transmitted  data  size,  and  the  range  of  transmitted  frequencies.  Further 
explanation  of  the  various  efficacy  measures  and  factors,  along  with 
explanation  of  their  relevance,  is  provided  below,  following  a  short 
description of the experimentation setup. 
 
6.1   Setup 
 

The  monitor  used  was  a  Samsung  SyncMaster  SA450.  The  operating 
system was Ubuntu 13.04 (raring) 64bit, kernel 3.8.0-29-generic. 
The  mobile  phone  was  a  Samsung  GT-I9300  Galaxy  S3.  The  Android 
version was Samsung stock 4.1.2. The baseband version was I9300XXEMC2. 
Kernel version was 3.0.31-1042335. The radio chip was Silicon Labs Si4705 
FM  Radio  Receiver  ICs.  We  used  the  standard  1.22  meters  (4  ft.)  stereo 
headphones that came with the mobile phone. Note that in this mobile phone 
model, the headphones are used as the FM receiver antenna. 
Four  types  of  cables were  used  to  connect  the  computer with  the  display 
unit:  (I) standard VGA  cable, 1.52 meters  (5  ft.), 30V, 15-pin male  to male; 

12 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
(II) standard VGA  cable, 0.91 meters  (3  ft.), HD15, male  to  female, usually 
used as projector extension cable; (III) HDMI cable, 0.91 meters (3 ft.), 30V. 
(IV) DVI  cable,  1.82 meters  (6  ft.),  30V.  Below we  refer  to  these  cables  as 
standard  VGA,  extension  VGA,  HDMI  and  DVI,  respectively.  Table  1 
provides relevant classifications of the cable types (i.e. Shielded/Unshielded, 
Analog/Digital). 
 

Table 1: Cable Classification 

Cable 
std VGA  
ext VGA  
HDMI 
DVI 

Shielding 
Shielded 
Unshielded 
Shielded 
Shielded 

Signal 
Analog 
Analog 
Digital 
Digital 

 
6.2   Signal Strength 
 

The strength of the received signal is expected to drop as the distance from 
the  transmitter  is  increased.  We  measured  the  Received  Signal  Strength 
Indication  (RSSI)  (see  Figure  3),  as  well  as  the  dBm  (decibel-milliwatts, 
see Figure 4), across varying distances. RSSI is an indicator of signal quality 
usually exposed by a chip's API. The RSSI scale is arbitrarily selected by the 
manufacturer  (Broadcom  in  the  case  of  the  tested  mobile  phone)  and  is 
usually a logarithmic scale related to the peak voltage of the received signal. 
dBm is also a logarithmic scale based on the power of the received signal  in 
reference to one milliwatt (power is affected by both voltage and current).  
The  RSSI  measurement  was  performed  by  calling  the  getCurrentRSSI 
function  of  IFMPlayer,  an  internal  Samsung  service  used  by  the  FM  radio 
player. dBm values were measured with an external spectrum analyzer.   
The RSSI measurements appear to be correlated with the effective distance, 
where  a measured value  of 10 on  the RSSI  scale  roughly  indicates  the  limit 
of the effective distance on each of the tested cables. 

13 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
Figure 3 :  Signal strength at varying distances (RSSI), using A-FSK. 
(Measured by mobile-phone FM receiver) 

 
 

 
 

 
Figure 4 : Signal strength at varying distances (dBm), using A-FSK. 
(Measured by an external spectrum analyzer) 

 
6.3   Effective Distance 
 
The effective distance is the maximal distance between the transmitter and 
the  receiver,  at which  the  transmission  quality  is  still  acceptable. As  can  be 
seen  in  Figure  5,  the  effective  distance  when  using  the  receiver  antenna  is 
significantly  larger with unshielded cable (extended VGA), compared  to  the 
shielded cables  (HDMI and  standard VGA). To summarize, with both cable  
types,  the  effective  distance  when  the  receiver  antenna  is  present  is  in  the 
order of 8-20 meters, which can be considered as useful for our purposes. 
Some  new  models  of  mobile  phones  are  equipped  with  built-in  FM 
antenna, which voids the need for headphones. 

14 
 

010203040506013579111315171921RSSIDistance (meters)std VGAext VGAHDMI/DVI-70-65-60-55-50-45-40-35-30-25-20                   dBmDistance (meters)std VGAext VGAHDMI/DVIThis is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 

 

 
Figure 5: Signal strength at varying distances, RSSI, using A-FSK 

6.4   Data Modulation Method 
 
The  signaling  method,  i.e.  A-FSK  or  DTMF  also  affects  the  effective 
distance. As can be seen  in Figure 6 A-FSK yields a slightly larger effective 
distance. 

 
Figure 6: Effective distance with varying cable types, with receiver antenna, 
using A-FSK and DTMF 

 
6.5   Transmission Quality 
 

The transmission quality (also referred to as the 'success rate') is defined as 
the rate of correctly received bytes per originally  transmitted bytes. The rate 

15 
 

110100100010000std VGAext VGAHDMI / DVIEffective Distance (cm)Cable typewithout antenawith antena0510152025std VGAext VGAHDMI/DVIEffective distance (meters)Cable typeA-FSKDTMFThis is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
was  measured  against  varying  signal  delays,  i.e.  the  time  interval  (in 
milliseconds) assigned for transmitting one byte of data.  
As can be seen in Figure 7, the correlation between the transmission quality 
and  the  signal  delay  is  logarithmic,  asymptotically  approaching  100%. 
Beyond  a  signal  delay  of  70ms,  the  additional  transmission  quality  seems 
negligible. 
Settling  on  70ms  seems  reasonable,  since  a  higher  delay  would  result  in 
slower  transmission  which  does  not  yield  significant  improvement  in  the 
transmission quality. 

 
Figure 7: Transmission quality at varying signal delays, using DTMF. 

 

As  shown  in  Table  2,  the  transmission  quality  (or  success  rate)  was 
measured  for  each  cable  type,  over  varying  distances. The  signal  delay was 
70 ms, which  is  the optimal value. The measurements  are  shown  for 0.3 m, 
for 6.2 m, and for the maximal distance at which the transmission quality was 
acceptable  (or  the  effective distance). As  can be  seen,  the maximal  distance 
has different values for various cable types. 
The  values  in  Table  2  reflect  the  behavior  of  the  transmission  quality, 
which retains an almost fixed high value over an increasing distance, until  it 
hits the maximal distance (which varies among the cable types). 
 

Table 2: Transmission quality over varying distance 
using DTMF 

Cable type 

Std VGA 
Ext VGA 
HDMI 
DVI 

Transmission quality (%)  Max distance 
(meters) 
At 0.3 m  At 6.2 m  At max 
7 
99.86 
99.27 
97.73 
22.2 
99.07 
99.37 
99.88 
6.8 
99.61 
99.27 
99.21 
99.5 
99 
99 
6.8 

16 
 

50556065707580859095100      Transmission quality (%)Signal delay (ms)std VGAext VGAHDMI/DVIThis is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
 

6.6   Data Size 
 

Effective  exfiltration  of  data  places  practical  limits  on  the  transmission 
time.  The  transmitting  program,  running  on  the  compromised  computer, 
should  hide  its  activities  and  has  limited  safe  time  intervals  where  the 
collected  data  can  be  broadcasted.  Additionally,  a  receiving  mobile  phone 
does not stay within the effective range of the transmitter for indefinite time. 
In  Table  3 we  show  the  transmission  time  of  various  types  of  files, with 
typical  sizes,  when  using  raw  data  and  when  using  structured  packets  (as 
described  in  the  'Implementation'  section).  A  70ms  delay  was  found  to  be 
optimal. The  time  required  for  transmitting  tiny-size data  (below 100 bytes) 
such  as  IP  &  MAC,  or  password,  is  below  ten  seconds,  which  seems 
acceptable.  Small-size  data  (below  10  KB)  such  as  system-information  or 
one-day  keylogging  would  require  several  minutes,  which  also  seems 
acceptable. However, documents  in  the order of 0.5 MB would  take  several 
hours  to  transmit and  this would  seem  to be unacceptable. Note  that  the  toll 
inflicted  by  using  structured  packets  compared  to  raw  data  seems  to  be 
tolerable, and justifies using this method when accurate reception is required. 
 
 
 

Table 3: Transmission time with varying data size (70ms delay) 

File (data size) 

IP & MAC (10 bytes) 
Password file (100 bytes) 
1 hour keylogging (1 KB) 
System information (2 KB) 
1 day keylogging (8 KB) 
Document (0.5MB) 

Raw data  Structured 
packets 
1 sec 
10 sec 
106 sec 
211 sec 
14.1 min 
15 hour 

<1 sec 
8 sec 
77 sec 
153 sec 
10.25 min 
10.9 hour 

 
 
 
7.  Countermeasures 
 
    Defensive countermeasures for general Tempest threats can be categorized 
into  technical vs. procedural. Countermeasures of  the technical kind  include 
(a)  physical  insulation,  (b)  software-based  reduction  of  information-bearing 
emission,  and  (c)  early  encryption  of  signals.  Procedural  countermeasures 
include  official  practices  and  standards,  along  with  legal  or  organizational 
sanctions. The relevant American and NATO standards, concerning Tempest, 
were held highly classified  throughout  the Cold War. Some of the standards 

17 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
eventually leaked or were released but are severely redacted [18] while more 
informative  documents, 
in  particular 
those  concerning  defensive 
countermeasures, are still classified. The prevailing standards aim at limiting 
the  level of detectable  information-bearing RF  signals over a given distance 
on  open  air,  or  its  equivalent  when  insulating  materials  are  used.  In  effect, 
certified  equipment  is  classified  by  'zones' which  refer  to  the  perimeter  that 
needs to be controlled to prevent signal reception  [19]. As a countermeasure 
against  attacks  like  the  one  in  this  research  the  ‘zones’  approach  should  be 
used to define the physical areas inside the organization, in which carrying a 
mobile phone or other radio receivers is prohibited. Another countermeasure 
is ensuring  that only properly shielded cables are used. Shielding affects  the 
effective range as shown by our experiments.   
 
8.  Related Work 
 

Anderson  [19]  provides  a  highly  informative  review  of  emission  or 
emanation  security  (Emsec):  preventing  attacks  which  use  compromising 
emanations  (CE)  consisting  of  either  conducted  or  radiated  electromagnetic 
signals.  In  1985,  van  Eck  [11]  demonstrated  how  Tempest  exploits  can  be 
produced with rather ordinary equipment and skills. Using a modified TV set, 
he managed  to  reconstruct  an  image  from  electromagnetic  signals  produced 
by Video Display Unit (VDU) at a considerable distance. During  the second 
half of the 1990s, several researches and publications related to Tempest were 
released  [12]  [13],  spurring  increased  public  interest.  This  trend  was 
amplified  by  the  Web  which  has  offered  a  glimpse  into  classified  official 
standards  related  to  Tempest  [18],  or  provided  detailed  instructions  and 
tutorials  related  to  Tempest  exploits  [14].  Kuhn  and  Anderson  [12]  [13] 
demonstrated  that many  of  the  compromising  emanations  from  a PC  can be 
manipulated by suitable  software,  in either a defensive or offensive manner. 
Thiele  [14]  [20]  offers  an  open  source  program  dubbed  'Tempest  for Eliza', 
that uses  the computer monitor to send out AM radio signals. The generated 
music  can  then  be heard  on one’s  radio. Kania  [15] provides  a  collection of 
programs for generating FM radio signals  in software, and  then transmitting 
them  using  a VGA  graphics  card.  In  our  implementation, we  used  different 
technique to generate FM signals in order to improve the signals quality.    
 
9.  Conclusion 
 

Exfiltration of data from air-gapped networks is not a trivial task. However, 
in  this  paper  we  introduce  AirHopper,  a  bifurcated  attack  pattern  by  which 
this  challenging  task  can  be  accomplished. The  core  of  the method  consists 
of  two  essential  elements:  (a)  electromagnetic  signals  emitted  from  a 
computer's monitor cable, with data intentionally modulated on those signals, 
and  (b)  an  FM  receiver  on  a  mobile  phone  that  can  collect  the  transmitted 

18 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
signals,  and  extract  the  modulated  data.  The  chain  of  attack  is  rather 
complicated,  but  is  not  beyond  the  level  of  skill  and  effort  employed  in 
modern  Advanced  Persistent  Threats  (APT).  Evaluation  of  the  proposed 
method includes experimental measurements of various measures such as the 
effective  transmitting distance,  cable  type,  the presence of  receiver antenna, 
etc. 
AirHopper  adds  to  an  understanding  of  electromagnetic  emission  threats, 
coupled with APT  techniques. This  research area  is not  sufficiently  covered 
in  recent  academic  literature.  We  believe  that  a  careful  professional  and 
academic discussion of this threat, ultimately serves the interest of the cyber-
defense community. 
 
References 
 
[1]   Nokia,  "Nokia  Corporation  Interim  Report  for  Q2  2013  and  January-
June 2013," 2013. 

[2]   Gartner, "Gartner Says Smartphone Sales Grew 46.5 Percent in Second 
Quarter of 2013 and Exceeded Feature Phone Sales for First Time," 14 
Available: 
August 
[Online]. 
2013. 
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2573415. 
[Accessed 
15 
September 2013]. 

[3]  

phoneArena.com, 
[Online].  Available: 
finder,"  2013. 
"phone 
http://www.phonearena.com/phones. [Accessed 8 October 2013]. 

[4]   M. Stroh, "Windows Phone Blog," Microsoft, 14 May 2013. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://blogs.windows.com/windows_phone/b/windowsphone/archive/2
013/05/14/nokia-s-first-metal-windows-phone-arrives-meet-the-sexy-
lumia-925.aspx. [Accessed 8 October 2013]. 

[5]   National  broadcaster  association,  "Equipping  Mobile  Phones  with 
Broadcast Radio Capability  for Emergency  Preparedness,"  September 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.nab.org/documents/advocacy/FMEnabledPhones/RadioEn
abledPhonesIssueSheet.pdf. [Accessed 8 October 2013]. 

[6]   Q. Z. P. R. B. T. Clark A., "An impact-aware defense against Stuxnet," 
in American Control, 2013.  

[7]  

J. Larimer, "An inside look at Stuxnet," IBM X-Force, 2010. 

[8]   W. J. L. III, Defending a New Domain, 2010.  

[9]   C. A. E.  I. K. A. Hamandi K.,  "Android SMS Malware: Vulnerability 
and Mitigation," in Advanced Information Networking and Applications 
Workshops, 2013.  

[10]   R.-P. Weinmann, "Baseband Attacks: Remote Exploitation of Memory 
Corruptions in Cellular," in Usenix, 2012.  

19 
 

This is a slightly revised version of the paper accepted by the 9 th IEEE International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014).  

 
 
[11]   W. van Eck, "Electromagnetic Radiation from Video Display Units: An 
Eavesdropping Risk?," Computers and Security 4, pp. 269-286, 1985.  

[12]   M.  G.  Kuhn  and  R.  J.  Anderson,  "Soft  Tempest:  Hidden  data 
transmission using electromagnetic emanations," in Information hiding, 
Springer-Verlag, 1998, pp. 124-142. 

[13]   M.  G.  Kuhn,  "Compromising  emanations:  Eavesdropping  risks  of 
computer  displays,"  University  of  Cambridge,  Computer  Laboratory, 
2003. 

[14]   E.  Thiele,  "Tempest 
[Online].  Available: 
for  Eliza,"  2001. 
http://www.erikyyy.de/tempest/. [Accessed 4 10 2013]. 

[15]   B. Kania, "VGASIG: FM radio transmitter using VGA graphics card," 
19 
4 
2009. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://bk.gnarf.org/creativity/vgasig/vgasig.pdf. [Accessed 4 10 2013]. 

[16]   Google,  "Android  API:  AudioRecord,"  02  11  2013.  [Online]. 
Available: 
http://developer.android.com/reference/android/media/AudioRecord.ht
m. [Accessed 03 11 2013]. 

[17]   "smali. An assembler/disassembler for Android's dex format," [Online]. 
Available: https://code.google.com/p/smali/. 

[18]   J.  McNamara,  "The  Complete,  Unofficial  TEMPEST  Information 
Page," 
Available: 
[Online]. 
1999. 
http://www.jammed.com/~jwa/tempest.html. [Accessed 4 10 2013]. 

[19]   R.  J.  Anderson,  "Emission  security,"  in  Security  Engineering,  2nd 
Edition, Wiley Publishing, Inc., 2008, pp. 523-546. 

[20]   E. Thiele,  "Tempest  for Eliza  (updated Readme  file)," 2004.  [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.olifantasia.com/projects/gnuradio/mdvh/videocard_rf_out
put/readme.fm.txt. [Accessed 4 10 2013]. 

[21]   USAF,  "AFSSI  7700:  Communications  and  information  emission 
security," Secretary of the Air Force, 2007. 

 
 

20 
 

