CREATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE LOCAL INFORMATION 
COMPUTER NETWORK OF INSTITUTE OF HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS 
AND NUCLEAR PHYSICS NSC KIPT

V.A. Dudnik, E.V. Krivorukov, V.I. Kudrjavtsev, T.M. Sereda, S.A. Us, M.V. Shestakov
  
National Science Center “Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology”, Kharkov, Ukraine
e-mail: dudnik@kipt.kharkov.ua 

Results   and   the  basic   stages  of   creation   and  development  of   local   information  computer  network  at   Institute  of 
High  Energy  Physics   and  Nuclear   Physics  NSC KIPT   for   last   five   years   are   submitted.  The  purpose  of  work  was 
increase   of   an   overall   performance   of   researchers   due   to   rational   use   of   resources   and   creation   on   base   local 
information computer network  of shared system. In article obtained experience and specificity of realization of such  
systems is reflected.
PACS: 13.75Gx

INTRODUCTION
The   history   of   use   of   computer   facilities,   and   in 
particular,   its   applications   for   automation   and 
processing’s   of   results   of   scientific   and   technical 
researches   testifies   that   at   all   stages   of   development   it 
was   necessary   to   search   for   the   compromise   between 
mutually   exclusive   requirements:   maximum   favorable 
interface   for   users   and   an   effective  utilization   technical 
and   software.   The   first   computers   were   exclusively 
given   the   user,   but   thus   the   extremely   expensive 
technical   equipment   was   used   very   inefficiently. 
Therefore   shared   systems   in   which   the   technical 
equipment  was used  very effectively have  been  created, 
but   numerous   users   frequently   slowed   down  work   each 
other,   and   efficiency   of   their   work   fell.   Therefore   in 
process   of   reduction   in   price   of   hardware   of   computer 
facilities   (CF)   and   with   the   advent   of   personal 
computers   (PC)   the   rational   decision   was   return   to 
exclusive use of means of the CF.
However  practice  has  shown,  that,  despite  of  a  wide 
circulation  of  personal  computer   facilities,  nevertheless, 
collective use of computing means in many cases gives a 
positive  effect   -  as  due   to  expansion  of  opportunities  of  
users   and   increase   of   efficiency   of   their   work,   and   for 
the account of more rational use of the equipment.
In  IHEPNP NSC KIPT  creation  and  development  of 
shared   systems   has   old   traditions.   However   in   new 
conditions  -  a   wide   circulation   of   personal   computers 
on   the   one   hand,   and   absence   of   powerful   computer  
complexes  -  with   another,   the   shared   system   should  be 
built   on   the   basis   of   technical   equipment   and   the 
software   initially  intended   for  personal  calculations   that 
generates   set   of   difficulties   in   the   organization   of   re-
liable   and   effective   work   of   such   systems.   In   article  
experience and specificity of realization of such systems 
is reflected.

LOCAL INFORMATION COMPUTER 
NETWORK AS A BASIS OF SHARED 
SYSTEM
The  means   to   transform   group   of   separate   personal 
computers   in   the   coordinated   multi-user   computer 
system,  the   local   information  computer  network  (LICN) 
is   capable.  The  user   connected   to   a  network,   can  easily 
share   copies  of   the   software   files  of   the  data  with other 
users, and also have access to the printers connected to a  
network, scanners and other peripheral equipment. Thus, 
advantages of sharing of the equipment and the software 
compensate   the   means   enclosed   in   connection   of   the 
personal computer.
In   a   concrete   case   of   the   nuclear   center   of 
IHEPNP NSC KIPT  personal computers are allocated in 
working   rooms  on   four   floors  of   an   industrial  building.  
The   total   of   personal   computers   included   in   LICN   and 
workstations   makes   more   than   60.   The   main   lines   of 
each   floor   represent   the   separate   segments   connected 
through   repeaters   and   concentrators   to   the   common 
trunk.
The   local   network   of   IHEPNP NSC KIPT   is 
constructed   on   the   basis   of   local   networks   Ethernet 
created in divisions and group of the personal computers 
allocated   for   collective   use   incorporated   among   them 
and   forming  the   server   center.  The   general   structure   of 
an offered network is resulted at the design below.

EQUIREMENTS OF LICN
Reliable   and   safe   functioning   of   LICN   can   be  
provided   only   under   condition   of   performance   of   the  
following set  of   the  requirements produced  on   the  basis 
of   experience   of   designing   and   operation   of   shared  
systems and networks of the computers.

PROBLEMS OF ATOMIC SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. 2005, № 6.
Series: Nuclear Physics Investigations (45), p. 87-89. 

87

ELECTROSECURITY OF WORKSTATIONS 
AND SERVERS
The   problem   consists   that   a   feed   of   personal 
computers   is   carried   out   usually   from   the   lighting 
orpower  electric   system of  220 V,   thus always  there  are 
outflow   of   a   current   through   circuits   of   power   units   of 
computers   (capacity   of   filters   of   handicap’s,   parasitic 
capacities of   transformers and  so  forth).  In  result on  the  
case   of   a   computer   always   probably   presence   of   some  
voltage   which   usually   is   not   felt,   and   even   in   case   of 
failure   of   power   supplies   of   a   computer   of   a  
consequence   is   limited  only  to   this  computer.  But  when 
the   computer   is   connected   to   a   local   network,   through 
wires   of   an   information   network   occurrence   of   electric 
contact   to  other  computers   is  possible.  In  such   situation 
failure   on   one   computer   can   cause   failure   of   all  
computers  of   the  whole  site  of  a   local  network.  Besides  

because   of   a   potential   difference   available   usually 
between   zero   wires   of   various   sites   of   lighting   and 
power  (force)  networks work behind  such computer  can 
be unsafe for users.
Therefore  one  of   the   obligatory   requirements   to   the  
equipment and  structure  of  a  network   is  maintenance  of  
an   electro   security.   Possible   failures   of   power   supplies 
on   any   workstation   or   a   server   should   not   cause 
damages   of   other   workstations   or   do   work   at   these 
stations dangerous to the personnel. The  best decision is 
the   full   electric   outcome   of   units   of   a   network   among 
themselves due  to  use of networks of radial structure on  
base   so-called   twisted   pair   and   refusal   of   use   of  
networks on  the basis of   the  common  trunk on   the  basis 
of   a   coaxial   cable.   Use   as   units   of   a   network   of 
concentrators   and   the   routers   having   optical   electronic 
outcomes;   have   allowed   achieving   a   comprehensible 
level of an electro security and reliability of LICN.

MAINTENANCE OF RELIABILITY OF 
FUNCTIONING OF A LOCAL NETWORK
During   work   of   LICN   as   frequent   enough 
phenomenon   failures   in   work   of   separate   workstations 
are.   It   is  connected  as  to  malfunctions of   the  equipment 
of   a   local   network   (network   adapters   in   computers, 
infringements of  contact  in sockets of a  network, breaks 
of   conductors   in   information   cables),   and   with   the 
various casual reasons. Similar possible infringements in 
work   of   separate   workstations   or   even   local   subnets 
should   not   cause   failures   in   work   of   a   network   as   a 
whole.   Use   of   radial   network   structure   allows 
minimizing   consequences   of   infringement   in  work   of   a  
network   and   facilitates   diagnostics   and   detection  of   the 
reason of such infringements.

CONTROLLABILITY OF A NETWORK
The   architecture   of   a   network   should   allow 
organizing   both   the   centralized   management   of   a 
network,   and   division   of   powers   on   management   and 
decentralized  support  of  separate  sites  of  a  network and  
local subnets. Such opportunities can be achieved due to  
use   of   hierarchical   structure   of   a   network   and 
concentrators   with   an   opportunity   of   routing   of 
information   packages.   Computers   -   units   of   subnet   are 
connected   to   such   concentrator,   and   as   localization   of 
the   traffic   (information   streams   between   computers   of 
subnet become  isolated   through  the  concentrator  and do 
not   load   other   sites   of   a   network),   and   increase   of  
reliability   (in   a   case   practically   any   malfunctions   in 
work   of   a   network   trouble-free   work   of   a   site   of   a 
network or subnet is provided) thus is achieved.

88

MAINTENANCE OF MULTIPLATFORM 
AND MULTIPROTOCOL WORK 
IN A NETWORK
The   great   value   has   also   maintenance   with   multi-
protocol   work   in   a   network   -   support   of   simultaneous 
work   in   a   network   of   the   workstations   using   various 
reports   of   an   exchange   (ТСР/IР,   IРХ,   NetBIOS),   and 
support   of   workstations   of   various   types   and   various 
operational   systems.   Use   as   transport   report   Ethernet 
ensures   the   functioning   into   these   most   widespread 
reports   that   allows   to   support   work   in   a   network   of  
stations on the basis of processors Intel, DEC, SUN and 
operational   systems   MS DOS,   Windows,   WIN NT, 
Windows 2000, UNIX (Linux).
Besides   the   structure  of  a   local  network  provides  an 
opportunity   of   connection   of   workstations   to   the   tele-
communication   center  -  ground   station   of   a   satellite 
communication   and   an   output   in   global   network 
Internet.

CONCLUSIONS
The   shared   system   described   in   the   given   work   on  
the   basis   of   the   personal   computer   is   created   and   used  
for   a   number   of   years   in   server   center   of 
IHEPNP NSC KIPT.
Operating   experience   within   several   years   of   such 
system has  shown sufficient  efficiency and  a  demand  of  
services   given   by   it.   Besides   it   is   possible   to   see,   that  
reliable   work   of   system   and   safety   of   the   user   data   is 
provided   at   a   sufficient   level   in   spite   of   the   fact   that 
usual   personal   computers   used   as   hardware   platforms 
have  a   level  of   reliability  not  above   the  average,  and  as  
the   basic   operational   system   OS   Microsoft   Windows-
2000 is used.

REFERENCE
1. V. Stolins.  Operating   systems.   The   internal 
device   and   designing,   4.  М:  The  Publishing  house 
"Williams", 2002, 848 p.

.

СОЗДАНИЕ И РАЗВИТИЕ ЛОКАЛЬНОЙ ИНФОРМАЦИОННОЙ ВЫЧИСЛИТЕЛЬНОЙ СЕТИ 
ИНСТИТУТА ФИЗИКИ ВЫСОКИХ ЭНЕРГИЙ И ЯДЕРНОЙ ФИЗИКИ ННЦ ХФТИ

В.А. Дудник, Е.В. Криворуков, В.И. Кудрявцев, Т.М. Середа, С.А. Ус, М.В. Шестаков

Представлены   результаты   и   основные   этапы   создания   и   развития   локальной   информационной 
вычислительной сети  Института физики высоких  энергий и ядерной физики ННЦ  ХФТИ  за  последние  пять 
лет.   Целью   работы   было   повышение   эффективности   работы   исследователей   за   счет   рационального  
использования   ресурсов   и   создание   на   базе  локальной   информационной   вычислительной   сети  системы 
коллективного пользования. В статье описывается накопленный опыт и специфика реализации таких систем.

СТВОРЕННЯ І РОЗВИТОК ЛОКАЛЬНОЇ ІНФОРМАЦІЙНОЇ ОБЧИСЛЮВАЛЬНОЇ МЕРЕЖІ 
ІНСТИТУТУ ФІЗИКИ ВИСОКИХ ЕНЕРГІЙ І ЯДЕРНОЇ ФІЗИКИ ННЦ ХФТІ

В.О. Дудник, Є.В. Криворуков, В.І. Кудрявцев, Т.М. Середа, С.А. Ус, М.В. Шестаков

Представлено  результати й основні  етапи створення  і  розвитку локальної  інформаційної  обчислювальної 
мережі   Інституту фізики високих енергій  і  ядерної  фізики ННЦ  ХФТІ  за  останні  п'ять років.  Метою  роботи 
було   підвищення   ефективності   праці   дослідників   за   рахунок   раціонального   використання   ресурсів   і 
створення  на   базі  локальної   інформаційної  обчислювальної  мережі  системи   колективного   користування.  У 
статті описано накопичений  досвід і специфіка реалізації таких систем.

89

