IJCA Special Issue on “2nd National Conference- Computing, Communication and Sensor Network” 
CCSN, 2011 

Enhancing Social Security through Network of Intelligent 
Human Nodes Trained by Computer Algorithm 

Dulal Acharjee 
Dept. of Information Technology 
Purushottam Institute of 
Engineering and Technology 
Rourkela, Orissa, India. 
 
 

Bhabani Shankar Panda    
Dept. of ETE  
Purushottam Institute of 
Engineering and Technology 
Rourkela, Orissa, India. 
 
 
 

Basudev Mahapatra 
Dept. of ETE 
Purushottam Institute of 
Engineering and Technology 
Rourkela, Orissa, India. 
 

ABSTRACT 
In  near  future,  all  manual  decisions  will  be  more  authentic, 
scientific  and  logic  based.  Through  continuous  evolutionary 
process,  scientist  developed  different  technologies  of  computer, 
communication  network  and  Information  Technology  using 
automated  computing  systems  to make  their work  more  perfect, 
accurate  and  errorless.  Important  information  has  been  made 
more  secured with  the help of computer algorithms.   Vulnerable 
intruders can‟t break the security  levels easily though exceptions 
are  there.  Different  levels  or  stages  of  security  checking 
encryption-decryption  systems  check  protection  to  the  valuable 
databases created everyday  throughout  the world . Information  is 
secured  by  computer  algorithm;  information  is  required  for 
making secured society. But, strange  is  that yet most of valuable 
wealth  of  the  Universe  is  left  unsecured.  After  having  much 
terrorist attack on civil creations,  it  is  imagined  that only police, 
army or any security people are not sufficient to provide security 
of  the  creation  of  the  Universe.  Trained  and  intelligent  human 
network  is  required  to  develop  who  can  scan  neighbour 
phenomena  all  time  and  gather  information  for  analysis  and 
taking  decision  purposes  dynamically.  This  paper  aims  to 
develop  some  conceptual  training  aspects  of  people  which  are 
similar to information security algorithm of computers. 

General Terms 
Social  security  and  network,  computer  algorithms  for  security, 
viruses, Social Security Servers of computer. 

Key Words 
Social security, hole area, terrorists attack, history database.   

1.  INTRODUCTION 
In  „human  rights,  terrorism  and  counter  terrorism‟  published  by 
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights, written  that “In order  to be considered  lawful,  the use of 
lethal  force  must  always  comply  with  the  principle  of  necessity 
…  or  for  the  defence  of  another‟s  life.  It  must  always  comply 
with  the  principle  of  proportionality,  and  non-lethal  tactics  for 
capture or prevention must always be attempted if feasible”[3]. 

A  terrorist  can  destroy  the  whole  creation  of  the  world.  A 
criminal  can  kill  his  neighbour  persons.  As  example,  the  Ex-
Prime  Minister  of  India,  Mrs.Indira  Gandhi,  was  killed  by  her 
own  security  guard.  X  a  leader  of  BJP(Bharatia  Janata  Party) 
was  killed  by  Y,  his  own  brother.  A  man  sitting  beside  of  you 
within train or a bus may switch on the remote controller to burst 
a bomb  for destroying a  train or an air  plane or any other public 

carrier.  The  attack  on  WTA(World  Trade  Association)  of 
America  indicates  that our social security system  is so poor. It  is 
not  the  lack of duty of security  forces but  lack of proper  training 
to  the  people  of  the  world  regarding  terror  attack.   So,  question 
arises,  if  a  terrorist  make  a  plan  to  burst  a  bomb  at  the  time  of 
praying within a  temple, mosque or a Church  then how  to detect 
that  malicious  person  to  nullify  his  intention  of  destroying  the 
civil creation. 

In  computer  algorithm,  there  are  some  techniques  to  detect  a 
malicious  node(device  or  computer)  which  is  spreading  viruses 
or  stealing  information  or  destroying  the  target  system.  Within 
any  network  of  information,  an  internet  network  or  any 
intranet(local  network),  all  electronic  equipments  including 
computers  are  connected  to  each  other.  When  data  move  from 
one place to another, it carries source, target and route addresses. 
Any  critical  programmer  intended  to  do  some  evil  job,  may 
collect  these  addresses  and  data  for  their  interest.  Analysing  the 
flow  and  movement  nature  it  is  possible  to  detect  what  type  of 
attack is happening on the network. This concept may be applied 
in social network. It is called bit by bit wise scanning. A bit does 
not  contain  any  information.  Multiple  bits  make  information.  If 
it  is possible to develop a social  intelligent network for scanning 
and  sharing  information  quicker  than  happening  time  of  danger, 
then it is possible to minimize the probability of accident.   

As  a  concept  of  technology,  neighbourhood  is  monitored  by 
sensor  network  which  sense  any  phenomena  of  neighbour  and 
aggregate data collected by different sensors, analyse it and send 
to  server computer(Sink Node)  for  taking decision.  If people are 
trained  properly  they  can  scan  the  neighbour  and  gather 
information  through  some  human  machine  interface  placed  at 
some  convenient  positions  for  gathering  security  information  of 
a locality. It does not mean that all people should disbelieve their 
neighbours, but means  that  all  people  should  initiate  an  additive 
process  in  their  thinking  to  give  more  security  to  others.  It 
means,  as  people  are  becoming  more  social  responsive,  now 
they  would  be  more  organized  with 
the  knowledge  of 
technological general concept. General people do not understand 
technology,  but  they  can  be  trained  by  the  high  level  concept  of 
technology.   

2.   DIFFERENT WAYS OF VIGILANCE 
As  human,  people  do  some  humane  activity  throughout  their 
lives.  They  don‟t  ask  any  remuneration  for  that  and  it  has 
become  practice  of  civil  society.  So,  one  more  activity  is 
proposed  to  add  with  other  activities  those  are  practised  every 
time. This extra activity could be performed in many ways:  

41 

IJCA Special Issue on “2nd National Conference- Computing, Communication and Sensor Network” 
CCSN, 2011 

a.  Observing neighbour. 
b.  Processing observed data. 
c.  Taking decision by human intelligence. 

It  is  tried  to model  the activity as a structured manner.  To model 
this  type  of  volunteer  activity  is  hard.  Side  effects  of  this model 
should  be  considered  also  when  it  would  be  implemented  in  an 
area  as  an  experimental  case.  This  model  is  an  activity  of  mass 
people who will be trained by different institutes/school/colleges 
or by govt. semi govt. security organizations. 

3.  OBSERVING NEIGHBOUR SECURITY 
In  computer  network,  all  nodes  are  connected  through  cables  or 
fibre  optical  cables  or  wireless  media.  Analyzing  the  flow  of 
data  packets,  behaviour  of  the  node  is  assumed  and  according 
the  analysis  report,  decision  of  communication  is  taken.  What 
jobs  are  done  by  each  node  may  be  tress.  Requirements  of 
enhancing  public  observation  to  neighbour would  be  justified  if 
some  examples  are  cited.  (a)Once,  in  a  flat  of  a  multi  storied 
building  suddenly  havoc  explosive  sound  of  bomb-bursting 
appeared  and  inhabitants  didn‟t  know  that  there  were  a  terrorist 
group engaged to make bomb. (b) A person was purchased by an 
intelligence  agency  of  enemy  country  and  suddenly  there  are 
some change in his movement and activities. (c) A person sitting 
beside  of  you  switched  on  a  bomb  to  burst  a  train  of  another 
state with  the help of his mobile phone.  (d) A mentally unhappy 
armed  person  suddenly  raised  his  automated  arms  and  fired  his 
neighbour  colleagues.  These  types  of  many  examples  can  be 
gathered  which  are  the  causes  of  insecurity  of  a  person  or  a 
locality.  Now  question  is  that  how  to  tress  it  and  store  all 
relevant information in database and gather information from the 
analysis  report.  Sometimes,  there  would  not  be  much  time  to 
analyse data. Occurrences are happening so quick, it is very hard 
to prevent at this moment. 

In computer network also,  same  type of problems  are happening 
every  time.  Computers  can  tress  it,  can  take  alternative  action, 
can  store  data  in  history  file  etc.  If  we  consider  every  computer 
as  a  human  node,  then,  the  problems  cited  above  may  be 
considered  as  the  problems  of  Cookie  or  dangerous  viruses 
which  can  crash  a  whole  hard  disk  or  the  total  network  system. 
A  cookie  is a  small program unit  sent by any person  to do  some 
job  within  the  computer  as  background  process.  This  unwanted 
program  unit  or  virus  unit  can  do  any  dangerous  job  within  the 
computer.  Solutions  of  these  problems  are  to  set  incoming 
protection  after  checking  incoming  flow  of  bit  stream  in 
different  way.  Generally  civil  people  don‟t  do  any  continuous 
scanning  or  checking  over  the  neighbour.  Rather,  they  depend 
on  security  persons  for  maintaining  security.  Security  persons 
can  scan  only  some  limited  areas. Coverage  area  is  a  concept of 
wireless communication. There are  lot of  holes areas which may 
not be covered by the exiting wireless network system. Problems 
are created  in  those uncovered areas. Another  important point  is 
that  ,  security  persons  can  scan  only  some  limited  attributes  of 
an  object,  but  there  are  thousands  of  unknown  attributes  which 
may  cause  harm  to  society  but  remains  within  holes  of  network 
as non scanned.   

In  any  position,  a  person  is  surrounded  by  neighbours  in 
different ways.  They may  be  tightly  or  loosely  coupled with  the 
neighbour.  Some  examples  of  neighbourhood  is  modelled  and 
shown through diagrams. 

 

 Fig.1.a. Home, hostel and             Fig.1.b. Office Network 
              room network to communicate with neighbours  
 
In  [3],  they  have  commented  on  RFC  3756  (Recommends  for 
commends,  group  of  network  protocol  formulation)  and  RFC 
3971  regarding  IPv6  (Internet  Protocol,  version  6)  Neighbor 
Discovery  (ND)  and  Trust  Models  and  Threats  and  SEcure 
Neighbor  Discovery  (SEND)  as  “…it  as  an  expression  of  an 
organizational  or  collective  belief,  i.e.,  an  expression  of 
commonly shared beliefs about  the future  behaviour of  the other 
involved  parties.  Conversely,  the  term  trust  relationship  denotes 
a mutual a priori relationship between the involved organizations 
or  parties  where  the  parties  believe  that  the  other  parties  will 
behave correctly even in the future”. 

Address resolving  is an  important work. Now a day, people may 
have  multiple  addresses  and  it  has  important  role  to  analyse  the 
person  activities.    In  internet,  each  computer  is  given  an  unique 
number known as  IP(Internet Protocol) number and  it  looks  like 
192.100.68.255.  But  in  advanced  version,  IPv6,  the  address 
spaces are of 16 bytes meaning  that  it may have 2128 numbers of 
computers  in  one  network.  Address  reveals  lot  of  information 
and we can learn the technique from the algorithm which is used 
for gathering information of neighbour.   

3.1 Confusion created by Malicious Nodes  
A malicious  node  creates  confusion  to  its  neighbour  in  different 
ways. It is dangerous for a network, so to search and find out is a 
critical  job  for  a  computer.  Sometimes  it  sends  wring  data, 
corrupt  data,  wrong  acknowledgement,  killing  router,  generates 
wrong  address  for  both  sender  and  receiver  nodes  etc.  Some 
important  attacks  are  listed  here:NS/NA  spoofing, NUD  failure, 
DAD DoS, Malicious  router,   Default  router killed, Good  router 
goes bad, Spoofed redirect, Bogus on-link prefix, Bogus address 
config,  Parameter  spoofing,  Replay  attacks,  Remote  ND  DoS. 
After  some  time,  a malicious node may act as  a good node also. 
Due  to  malicious  response  detected  for  a  while,  new  algorithm 
can make sustain the network. 
Knowledge can be gathered how to tackle these nodes and not to 
kill  those nodes assuming  they may behave as a good node after 
some  time.  A  vary  difference  with  social  laws  is  that  „lawful 
human  don‟t  allow  to  live  a  killer  but  computer  don‟t  kill  a 
killer‟.               

4.  SOCIAL SECURITY SERVER(3S) 
Now  a  days,  people  wear  different  types  of  wireless  mobile 
equipments  which  may  tress  position,  trends  of  movement, 
duration  of  staying  in  a  position  etc.  Analysis  of  these  data 
collected  from  these  equipments  can  give  some  idea  about  the 
profession  of  the  user.  Some  people  do  switch  off  their  mobile 
phone at  the  time of emergency works,  time of  sleeping,  time of 
taking  rest  or  at  the  time  of  not  to  disturb.  Some  criminals  may 
switch  off  their  mobile  phone  that  they  may  not  be  tress  at 

42 

IJCA Special Issue on “2nd National Conference- Computing, Communication and Sensor Network” 
CCSN, 2011 

particular time. But, analysing the time and location of switching 
off and switching on, some clue may be found from these history 
data. Suspected phones may be kept under vigilance.  
 

 

Fig.2.a.Network within            Fig.2.b. Network of  
Bus,Train and Plane.                security in village. 

large  database 
roaming-history  needs 
Storing  data  of 
administration  system.  At  present,  in  all  ISP(Internet  Service 
provider)  or  mobile  phone  service  providers  store  some  data  of 
history  of  movement  of  users  in  their  BSC(Base  Station 
Controller),  MSC(Mobile  Switching  Center),  HLR(Home 
Locating  Register),  VLR(Visitors  Locating  Register).  These  are 
different  types  of  computers  placed  at  different  locations  of  the 
network  in  the  country.  Architecture  of  these  networks  was 
designed aiming  to give support for mobile users. At  that  time  it 
was  not  thought  that  these  networks  could  provide  some  sort  of 
social  security  services.   There may  be  different  approaches  and 
techniques  for  enhancing  social  security.  One  of 
these 
techniques is to keep history-data within 3S servers with an extra 
sub-module of software. 

5.  BIO-SECURITY DEVICES 
Electronic  devices  used  for  security  purposes  are  known  to  all. 
Due  to  known  technology,  terrorists  can  develop  anti  po licy  to 
nullify  all  positive  activities  adopted  by  civil  people.  New  bio 
medicine  having  radioactive  or  some  other  type  of  radiation 
feature may  be  injected  or  fed  as medicine which  can  locate  the 
position  of  person  also  can  record  the  mental  status  of  a  person 
within  the  cell  of  3S.  At  the  child  age,  different  vaccines  are 
applied  and  its  effects  remain  for  whole  life.  Some  medicine  or 
bio-devices  may  be  injected  at  the  child  age  that  would  have 
result  for  whole  life.  If  it  is  possible  to  invent,  then  no  children 
would be lost or no person could be hijacked.  If so, then terrorist 
would  try  to  develop  some  anti  medicine  which  would  destroy 
the medicines injected previously. As that type of research is not 
possible  for  a  small  group  or  a  person,  the  model  exp ressed 
before  will  remain  secure  for  a  long  time.  Gradually,  research 
and  invention  would  give  some  measure  of  security.  We  know 
that 100% security is an impractical thinking.  

6.  ALGORITHM OF COVERAGE AREA 
Any  service  has  some  coverage  areas.  Services  can‟t  cover  all 
areas. Due  to wrong  design  or  limitation  of  resources,  hole-area 
is  generated  or  non-serviced  area  is  found  within  the  expected 
service  area.  All  evils  come  through  this  hole-area.  Different 
types  of  algorithms  for  covering  the  maximum  area  are- 
centralized,  disjoint  centralized,  parallel  centralized,  distributed 
algorithms  etc.  Optimized  deployment  of  human  nodes  and 
proposed 3S can minimize the critical hole area generated within 
the target service area[4].  

In computer, covering  the area of hole means providing  services 
of  some  attributes  like  signal  strength  or  sending  receiving  data 
or  minimizing  BER(Bit  Error  Rate)  within  those  area  also.  At 

limited 
limited  services  with 
present,  computers  provide 
attributes.  But,  Social  security  demands  covering  whole  area 
with  more  attributes  of  social  people  than  computer  can  do. 
Observing  neighbour  means  observing  attributes  of  neighbour 
objects. Neighbour may be any person or any type of an object.    

7.  ACTIVITY  OF  A  TRAINED  HUMAN 
NODE 
Activities  should  be  defined  for  all  human  nodes.  There  are 
different  levels  of  responsibilities  and  are  distributed  by 
professional  organizations  like:  police,  army,  security  agencies 
etc.  Some  responsibilities  may  be  given  by  other  organizations 
like  NGOs,  Schools,  Colleges, 
universities, 
business 
organizations,  government  organizations  like-Parliament,  local 
governing  body,  district  management  body  etc. 
to 
their 
responsible executives. Some trained nodes may take training on 
particular activities and others can  take on other  activities. Some 
of  activities  names  are:  observing  new  comer  in  neighbour, 
observing  in and out  time, gathering  information about  the  types 
of  business  they  are  involved,  source  of  income,  sources  of 
expenditure,  locations  of  movement  of  neighbours,  friends  and 
enemies of neighbours etc. 

7.1  Communication With 3S  
Human  Nodes  will  contain  a  powerful  mobile  communication 
device with  high  storage  capacity. He  should  has  easy  access  to 
the  3S  for  storing,  editing,  deleting  some  information  of 
neighbour  observed  by  him.  Or  he  may  store  a  new  state  of 
observation as a new record. To  test or verify decision or action, 
some  software  should  be  there  to  analyse  local  data  with  full 
online 
of 
infrastructure 
3S.  The 
interaction  with 
telecommunication  system  can  be  utilized  to  set  new  server  like 
3S.  At  different  locations  of  mobile  phone  service  providers, 
different  types  of  3S  servers  can  be  installed  with  proper 
software. A conceptual architecture of network with 3S is shown 
below: 

Social Security 
Server 

 

3S 

Human Node 

3S 

3S 

3S 

3S 

Neighbours 

 

 
Fig 3: Topology of Social Security Network 

The  variance  of  decision  making  is  a  term  through  which  we 
may measure  our  correctness  of  the  system.  If  variance  is more, 
then  changing  different  related  parameters  value  we  may  think 
curve. 
error 
of 
adjustment 
suitable 
for 

 

43 

IJCA Special Issue on “2nd National Conference- Computing, Communication and Sensor Network” 
CCSN, 2011 

Here,  Xi  is  the  different  input  set  and 
  is  the  mean  of  input 
data  set.  From  the  fig.3  it  is  shown  that  input  is  attributes  of 
neighbor.  

There  is  another  measure  in  Statistics,  named,  „P -Value‟  which 
is  a  statistical  value  that  details  and  give  probability  of  avoiding 
the  most  common  explanation  for  the  data  set.  p-value  is  the 
probability  that  the  null  hypothesis  on  input  data  set  is  true.  For 
designing  the  parameters  of  hypothesis  testing,  researchers  can 
set fuzzy weight to their options to test level of significance. The 
sensitivity of  the output and standards for  the decision can all be 
sensitive to the smallest error. 

So, if we can develop a technology which can provide us correct 
attribute  values,  then  it  is  possible  to  adjust  error  values  using 
BPN(Back  Propagation  Algorithm)  of  neural  network.  In  this 
algorithm, a small amount of output value  is fed back with  input 
or  weight  data.  A  simple  equation  to  adjust  weight  and  input 
values are : 

W(new)=W(o ld)+ΔW   and 

X(new)=X(old)+ ΔX    

Where,  ΔW  and  ΔX  are  small  changes  of  weight  and  input 
values. After many epochs, a moderate decision may be taken on 
any event[1]. 

Fuzzy  logic  can  be  used  for  quantifying  the  decision parameters 
also.  Mostly,  social  neighbour‟s  attributes  are  in  the  form  of 
fuzzy  and  can‟t  be  defines  as  crisp  or  numerical  form.   Let  us 
give an example: Movement of a man  in a  locality  is  suspicious. 
Here,  „movement‟  is  the attribute of neighbour, and  „suspicious‟ 
is  a  qualifying  parameter  expressed  in  fuzzy  form.  Movement 
can  be  qualified  as:  „normal‟,  „suspicious‟  and  „dangerous‟. 
These three fuzzy data are in the scale of suspicious. 

The  mobile  device  worn  by  human  nodes  should  contain 
intelligent  software  module  with  different  option  to  support  the 
requirements  of  people.  Sitting  at  any  place,  a  human  node  can 
access 3S and get output of expected data. He should manipulate 
data in different way  for  investigation, but he should not suspect 
a  neighbour  as  suspicious  unless  data  from  3S  is  analysed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8.  CONCLUSION 
Here,  we  have  placed  our  high  level  concepts  that  in  future 
people  can  develop  more  secured  and  logic  based  neighbour.  It 
is understood that for enhancing social security, active part of all 
people  of  the  world  is  required.  And  it  is  envisaged  that  a 
planned  training  is  required  to different  sections of people  to  set 
extra  security  measures  at  different  sections  as  we  have  set 
planned  antivirus,  firewall  of  shield  within  operating  system. 
Nodes  deployment  is  an  important  issue  and  this  point  is 
discussed for minimizing the hole area through optimized human 
node deployment. Data, system and  the creations of human need 
more secured environment. Valuable creations should not be  left 
without  security.  Till  more  investment  is  not  possible,  or  with 
the  modern  electronic  system  more  trained  human  node  should 
be  deployed  to  cover  security  holes.  Human  nodes  are  not  the 
replacement of electronic instruments. But  it  is proposed  to  train 
people in view point of security.    

This  paper  assumes  that  in  future,  human  thinking  and  decision 
making  will  be  logically  automated.  In  place  of  imagination, 
more  structured  thinking  will  be  acted  with  the  help  of 
intelligent  machine.  Gradually,  in  future,  all  decision  will  be 
automated and structured. 

9.  REFERENCE: 
[1]    S N Sivanandam  ,  S  Sumathi  ,  S N Deepa              Introduction 
To NEURAL NETWORKS USING MATLAB         6.0, Tata 
McGraw Hill, 2006. 

[2]  William  Stallings,  Cryptography  and  Network  Security,    
PEARSON Prentice Hall, Fourth Edition, 2006. 

[3] Office of  the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights,  Human  Rights,  Terrorism  and  Counter-terrorism, 
Fact Sheet No. 32. 

[4] Z. Abrams, A.Goel and S.Plotkin,”Set k-kover algorithms for 
evergy  efficient  monitoring  in  Wireless  Sensor  Network”, 
proceeding  of  3rd 
Int.  Symposium  on 
Information 
Processing in Sensor Networks, ACM 2004, pp.424-432.  

       

44 

X