SECURE NETWORK-ENABLED COMMERCIAL AIRPLANE OPERATIONS: 
IT SUPPORT INFRASTRUCTURE CHALLENGES 
Richard V. Robinson1, Krishna Sampigethaya1, 2, Mingyan Li1, Scott Lintelman1,  
Radha Poovendran2, and David von Oheimb3 
 
1 Boeing Phantom Works, Bellevue, WA 98008, USA 
2 Network Security Lab (NSL), University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA 
3 Siemens Corporate Technology, 81730 München, Germany 

 

ABSTRACT 

The  next-generation  commercial  airplane  models  have 
networking  facilities  that  enable  onboard  systems  to 
communicate  between  themselves  as  well  as  with  off-
board  systems.  This  new 
feature  allows  network 
applications 
for  airplane 
realize  many  benefits 
to 
manufacturing,  operations  and  maintenance  processes. 
However,  at  the  same  time  vulnerabilities  are  introduced 
that  can  threaten  the onboard systems. Regulatory bodies 
such  as 
the  EASA  and  FAA 
recognize 
that 
the 
unprecedented  network-enabled  airplane  model  may 
impact  long-established  safety  regulations  and  guidance. 
In  this  paper,  we  focus  on  securing  a  specific  network 
application,  i.e.  the  electronic  distribution  of  airplane 
loadable  software.  The  use  of  data  networks  provides 
opportunities  for  corruption  of  safety-critical  and  business-
critical  airplane  software.  The  paper  presents  a  security 
framework  that we have proposed  for  identifying  threats  to 
the  airplane  software  distribution,  and  mitigating  them. 
Additionally,  challenges  to  securing  the  distribution,  and 
open  problems 
the  security  of  network-enabled 
in 
airplanes are discussed.  
1. 
INTRODUCTION 

The  convergence  of  rapidly  expanding  world-wide  data 
communication  infrastructures, network-centric  information 
processing,  and  commoditized  lightweight  computational 
hardware,  has  brought  the  aerospace  industry  to  the 
threshold  of  a  new  era  in  aviation:  the  age  of  a  fully 
network-enabled  or  “eEnabled”  airplane.  The  prospects  in 
commercial  aviation  are  exceedingly  optimistic  for  airline 
businesses  and  the  flying  public  alike,  as  the  eEnabled 
airplane  promises  to  provide  a  basis  for  improvements  in 
passenger amenities, schedule predictability, maintenance 
and operational efficiencies, flight safety, and other areas.  
However,  as  large-scale  airplanes  employ  more  internal 
computer  processing  and  network  facilities,  and  become 
connected  with 
network 
environments 
off-board, 
opportunities  for  information  security  attacks  open.  The 
widespread  use  of  commercial  off-the-shelf  components 
raises  the  potential  for  re-engineering  and  sabotaging 
aircraft  IT  components.  Regulatory  institutions  have  yet  to 
systematically  address 
security  needs 
information 
appropriate  to  commercial  aircraft,  such  as  the  network-
enabled  787-8  airplane  model10,11.  Indeed,  while  the 
framework  informing  safety  engineering  principles  and 
practices for airplanes and airplane software is mature and 
widely  agreed  (e.g.  RTCA  DO-178B),  no  such  framework 
exists for corresponding information security needs4. 

This  paper  describes  an  approach  and  methodology  for 
addressing  one  specific,  well-defined  aspect  of 
the 
eEnabled  airplane  security  problem,  viz.,  electronic 
distribution  of  airplane  loadable  software.  Today,  industry 
standard  mechanisms 
for 
retaining  and  distributing 
airplane  loadable  software  parts1  are  evolving  away  from 
processes  that  handle  physical  storage  media,  in  favor  of 
electronic storage and distribution via computer networks2. 
We  analyze  security  issues  that  emerge when  information 
networks are used to store and distribute airplane loadable 
software  and  describe  an  approach  to  ensuring  the 
integrity of such parts throughout their lifecycles.  

Correctness  of  certain  airplane 
loadable  software 
components,  e.g.  flight  control  computer  software,  has 
direct  safety  implications.  This  self-evident  observation  is 
addressed  at 
the  standards  and  advice 
in 
length 
mandated,  for  example  in  RTCA  DO-178B1,  for  assuring 
the  quality  of  airplane  loadable  software  during  its  design 
and  development.  The  integrity  of  safety-critical  software 
parts  must  not  be  compromised.  However,  the  use  of 
public  networks 
for  storing  and  distributing  airplane 
software  may  expose  vulnerabilities  that  can  be  exploited 
to attack the integrity of parts, potentially posing a threat to 
airplane  safety  by  reducing  safety  margins.  Furthermore, 
attackers  might  exploit  vulnerabilities 
to  compromise 
systems  in  a  manner  that  reduces  passenger  comfort  or 
confidence, 
impedes  airline  business  processes,  or 
creates  unwarranted  delays  or  expenses.  In  effect,  the 
industry’s  investment  in  the  safety  and  reliability  of 
airplane software is at risk.  

In  this  paper,  we  summarize  our  analysis  of  requirements 
for  a  generic  heterogeneous  system  for  electronic  storage 
and  distribution  of  airplane  software  (an  Airplane  Asset 
Distribution  System  or  AADS)3.  We  identify  the  security 
threats,  and  propose  countermeasures  in  the  form  of 
security  primitives  sufficient  to  address  those  threats 
comprehensively.  

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2 
presents  an  overview  of  the  proposed  security  framework. 
We  present  the  AADS  model,  security  threats  to  AADS, 
and  requirements  for  mitigating  the  threats.  We  also 
outline  a  solution  approach  based  on  digital  signatures 
that  can  provide  end-to-end  security  for  AADS.  Section  3 
discusses various unprecedented challenges presented by 
the  secure  AADS 
to  airplane  operators.  Section  4 
discusses  open  problems  and  future directions  in  the area 
of eEnabled airplane security, and Section 5 concludes. 

2.  A SECURITY FRAMEWORK FOR AIRPLANE 
SOFTWARE DISTRIBUTION 

As  will  be  seen  in  Section  3,  these  constraints  complicate 
the design of the secure AADS by requiring tradeoffs. 

2.1.  AADS Model 

Fig.  1  shows  the  constituent  entities  in  the  AADS  model. 
As 
illustrated,  a  supplier  creates 
loadable  software 
appropriately  assured  for  safety,  and  distributes  the 
software 
to  an 
intermediate  entity, 
i.e.  the  airplane 
manufacturer,  owner  (an  airline)  or  third-party  servicer. 
The  intermediate  entity  stores  the  loadable  software  and 
distributes it to the airplane or to a next intermediate entity. 
An  attacker  may  attempt  to  corrupt  software  by  exploiting 
network  and  system  vulnerabilities  or  as  an  insider  at  an 
intermediate  entity.  Additionally,  we  consider  the  following 
constraints (C1 through C4) on the AADS system. 
(C1)  Fig.  1  illustrates  that  an  airplane  can  traverse 
– 
multiple  airports  with  different  networking  capabilities. 
Each  airport  at  which  the  airplane  receives  software 
may  employ  one  among  many  available  wireless 
standards  for  its  network,  or  may  not  have  any 
network  connectivity  whatever.  Therefore  apart  from 
interoperability,  an  airplane  is  faced  with  intermittent 
connectivity  along  its  traversed  path.  Moreover,  at 
each  traversed  airport,  the  airplane  may  need  to 
communicate with multiple off-board systems. 
(C2)  Fig.  1  also  shows  that  an  airplane  can  receive 
software  from  multiple  suppliers.  Additionally,  in  the 
presence  of  multiple  owners  and  servicers  at  each 
traversed  airport,  the  airplane  must  accept  software 
only from its owner and/or authorized servicer. 
(C3) As a business objective for the AADS, the impact 
of  security  requirements  on  the  airplane  owner  must 
not be excessively costly. 
(C4)  Changes  to  the  AADS  (e.g.  use  of  onboard 
networks  and  security  mechanisms)  with  potential 
impact  on  airplane  safety  warrant  modifications  to 
mandated airplane safety regulations and guidance. 

– 

– 

– 

We assume that the airplane operator verifies the loadable 
software  configuration  to  be  correct  after  upload  to 
onboard  systems.  Verification  may  be  enabled  by  an 
airplane configuration  list of software parts available  to  the 
operator.  We  also  assume  airplane  loadable  software 
design  is  fault-tolerant,  e.g.  multiple  instances  of  software 
exist  in  system  to  prevent  a  single  point  of  failure  during 
execution.  Moreover,  we  assume  that  redundancy  checks 
help  prevent  installing  manipulated  software  on  airplane 
LRUs.  Nevertheless,  threats  to  the  service  provided  by 
AADS emerge as discussed next. 

2.2.  Security Threats 

Data networks have vulnerabilities that can be exploited by 
attackers attempting to tamper with AADS operation. 

Airplane  safety  threats.  To  lower  safety  margins  of  an 
airplane,  attackers  can  attempt  to  manipulate  and  corrupt 
the  airplane’s  safety-critical  software  parts  (e.g.  DO-178B 
Level  A  parts)  during  distribution.  Safety  threats  are 
reduced  to  an  extent  by  the  error-detecting  and  fault-
tolerant  design  of  on-board  systems.  So  the  main  safety 
threat  is  that  coherent  intentional  manipulation  of  genuine 
parts  or  injection  of  fake  parts  by  well-informed  attackers 
could go undetected. 

Business  threats.  Late  detection  of  part  manipulation, 
tampering  with  the  AADS  administrative  messages  (i.e., 
upload  commands, 
inventory 
requests  and 
related 
responses)  which  may  lead,  for  instance,  to  false  alarms, 
and  general  denial  of  service  attacks  on  software 
distribution can all create unwarranted delays to flights and 
increase  owner  costs.  An  airplane  owner’s  business  can 
also  be  impeded  if attackers manipulate non-safety critical 

Fig. 1 - Illustration of the Airplane Asset Distribution System (AADS) model and its constraints, i.e. multiple 
suppliers delivering software to airplane, and multiple airports are traversed by airplane. 

software,  such  as  cabin  light  system  software  and  other 
DO-178B  Level  D  or  E  parts,  to  generate  visible  onboard 
system  malfunctions  and  lower  passenger  confidence  or 
convenience.  Further,  an  eavesdropper  can 
induce 
intellectual property costs by illegally distributing copyright-
protected software. 

2.3.  Security Requirements 

In  order  to  address  the  two  classes  of  threats,  the 
following security requirements must be met by the AADS. 
– 
Integrity:  Software  received  by  the  airplane  must  be 
correct,  i.e.  as  produced  at  its  supplier.  This  ensures 
that  any  manipulation  of  the  content  of  distributed 
software  is  detected.  The  part  identity  must  be 
protected  with  the  part,  such  that  it  can  be  enforced 
that  (the  right  version  of)  the  part  is  accepted  at  the 
right  destination  as  desired  by 
the  airplane 
configuration management. 
–  Authenticity:  Each  software  part  by  the  airplane  must 
be  traceable  to a  trusted source,  i.e. any  intermediate 
entity in the model and/or its supplier.  
–  Authorization:  The 
identity  and  corresponding 
privilege  (e.g.  allowed  to  send  software  part)  of 
subjects attempting  to perform critical actions must be 
verified.  This  helps  ensure  that  the  received  software 
is valid and enables traceability. 
–  Traceability: Any action related to software distribution 
must be logged and attributed to a responsible entity. 
–  Early  Detection:  The  fact  that  a  part  has  been 
tampered  with  must  be  detected  as  early  as  possible 
(that  is,  by  the  next  trusted  entity  handling  it)  to 
reduce  propagation  of  invalid  parts  and  minimize 
delays to obtain replacements 
–  Correct  Status  Reporting:  Status 
information 
concerning  asset  use,  in  particular  reports  on  the 
current  contents  of 
the  airplane  on-board  parts 
storage  and  signature  expiration  information  must  be 
correct.  This  avoids,  for  instance,  false  claims  about 
missing parts. 
–  Availability:  As  long  as  there  is  sufficient  connectivity, 
AADS  must  ensure  in-time  delivery.  Should  the 
network  be  unavailable, 
there  must  be  backup 
mechanisms to distribute software to the airplane (e.g. 
physical transfer of CD/DVDs). 
We  refer  the  reader  to  [3]  and  [5]  for  a  detailed exposition 
of  the  threats,  requirements,  and  their  adequacy  in 
meeting specific threats in AADS. 

2.4.  Security Mechanisms 

Digital  signature  with  a  timestamp  offers  a  public  key 
cryptography based mechanism for protecting integrity and 
authenticity  of  software  parts,  as  well  as  satisfying 
traceability  and  even  non-repudiation.  Further,  we  note 
that  public  key  encryption  can  serve 
to  protect 
confidentiality  of  software  parts  with  intellectual  property 
content when needed. 

We  note  that  virtual  private  networks  (VPN)  do  not  suffice 
as  a  solution  for  AADS.  A  VPN  authenticates  the  source 
integrity  and  confidentiality. 
and  protects  message 
However,  message  authentication 
is  not  provided. 
Therefore,  a  VPN  cannot  guarantee  that  software  parts 
received are authentic.  If an attacker sends a manipulated 

part over VPN, the destination will incorrectly accept it as a 
valid part as long as its integrity is verifiable. 

In order  to verify a signature,  the corresponding public key 
must be  retrieved  from a digital certificate. The destination 
system  receives  the  certificate  along  with  the  signed 
software  part.  For  verifying  the  validity  of  the  received 
certificate,  the  receiver  can  either  use  off-line  verification 
with  a  trusted  set  of  preloaded  certificates  or  verification 
with a trusted third party called Certification Authority (CA). 
The  preloaded  certificates  or  CA  public  key,  respectively, 
must  be 
transported 
to 
the  airplane  using 
integrity 
protected  out-of-band  processes.  The  CA 
forms  an 
integral  part  of  a  public-key  infrastructure  (PKI),  with 
functions  that  include  certifying  the  signing  keys,  and 
distributing  certificates  for  these  keys  as  well  as  checking 
their validity  (revocation status)8. Although  this paper does 
not consider details of PKI, in Sections 4 and 5 we discuss 
some  of  the  challenges  raised  by  PKI  and  public  key 
based solutions.  

2.5.  Security Evaluation Requirements 

We  have  developed  a  formalized  version  of  our  proposed 
security  framework  for  the  AADS5  as  a  Common  Criteria 
(CC)7  Protection  Profile.  Based  on  an  analysis  of  the 
information  value  of  safety-critical  assets  (e.g.  Level  A 
software)  and  the  nature  of  expected  threats  against  the 
security  of  those  assets,  we  have  justified  the  minimum 
Evaluation  Assurance  Level  (EAL)7  for  the  integrity  and 
authenticity  protection  by  the  AADS  as  EAL  6.  However, 
we  have  also  determined  that  handling  less  critical 
software  parts  and  the  business-related  security  aspects 
require  only  EAL  4.  Our  analysis  is  validated  by  the 
Information  Assurance  Technical  Framework  (IATF)6, 
Chapter 4, “Technical Security Measures”. 

3.  CHALLENGES TO SECURING THE AADS 

The  proposed  use  of  security  solutions  such  as  digital 
signatures  and  certificates 
Internet 
to 
is  not  new 
applications.  Financial  institutions  and  other  businesses 
engaging  in  e-commerce  are  aware  of  the  returns  from 
investing  heavily  in  security  solutions  for  their  online  data 
transactions9.  However,  the  use  of  information  security 
solutions  in  airplane  applications  is  relatively  new  to  the 
aviation  industry.  Several  unprecedented  challenges  arise 
that  must  be  addressed.  For  example,  implementing 
security 
in  applications  while  meeting 
the  unique 
restrictions  presented  by  onboard/off-board  environments 
(e.g.  the  constraints  of  AADS  listed  in  Section  2.1). 
Another  example  is  evaluation  of  the  impact  of  secure 
applications  on  airplane  manufacturers  and  owners,  e.g. 
balancing  added  operational  costs  with  expected  returns 
from  the  security  investment.  We  highlight  the  important 
challenges arising in the secure AADS. 

3.1.  Verifying Signatures at Traversed Airport 
w ithout Network Connectivity 

An  airplane  may  traverse  multiple  airports  during  its  end-
to-end  flight,  requiring  the  ability  to  handle  intermittent 
network  connectivity  along  its  trajectory  (constraint  C1  in 
Section  2.1).  Further,  at  each  airport,  airplane  systems 
may  be  required  to  connect  securely  to  multiple  off-board 

systems,  e.g.  wireless  networks  and  airline  IT  systems. 
Consequently,  any  candidate  security  solution  for  airplane 
applications  must  be  scalable  in  terms  of  total  number  of 
communicating  off-board  systems.  With  the  use  of  digital 

suppliers,  one  solution  approach  is  to  have  the  airplane 
verify  signatures  of  suppliers  on  the  parts.  Additionally,  to 
ensure  that  the  airplane  accepts  parts  only  from  its 
authorized  owner,  the  airplane  must  verify  the  owner’s 

Fig. 2 - Illustration of proposed approaches meeting the AADS constraints. The top half is a schematic of 
secure software distribution from suppliers to airplane using either preloaded certificates or proper PKI (CA) 
at airplane. The bottom half shows high-level protocols for secure software distribution with verification (end-
to-end) or without verification (hop-by-hop) of supplier signature at airplane. SignX(p) denotes signature of 
entity X on part p. Cert(X) denotes certificate of entity X. 

signatures  the  problem  reduces  to  ensuring  airplane 
systems are able  to verify certificates  from  these off-board 
systems.  Therefore, even  if backup mechanisms are used 
to  transfer  software  to  the  airplane,  the  certificates 
received  with  the  software  still  need  to  be  verified.  In  this 
paper,  we  consider 
two  extreme  approaches 
for 
verification  of  the  validity  of  certificates  received  by 
airplane  systems,  as  shown  in  the  top  right  side  of  Fig.  2, 
as well as their combination. 

One  approach  is  based  on  a  PKI  that  provides  online 
verification  to  check  certificate  validity  or  the  latest 
certificate  revocation  lists  to  the airplane over  the network. 
Obviously,  this  approach  is  limited  by  the  availability  of 
networks  at  traversed  airports.  On  the  other  end  of  the 
spectrum  is  an  approach  that  pre-loads  certificates  in  the 
airplane,  providing  offline  verification  of  signatures. 
However,  with  this  approach,  revocation  of  certificates  is 
very  limited  and  the  scalability  is  limited  by  the  number  of 
communicating  off-board  systems  and  by  the  number  of 
software suppliers, as seen next. 

3.2.  Verifying Signatures from Multiple 
Suppliers and Owners 

The  AADS  comprises  multiple  suppliers  that  produce 
software  for  a  given  airplane.    Multiple  owners  may  be 
present at any given airport  (constraint C2  in Section 2.1). 
In  order 
to  protect  software  parts  distributed 
from 

signature  on  the  parts.  As  shown  in  Fig.  2,  each  supplier 
signs  its  software  parts,  the  owner  verifies  the  owner 
signature  and  adds  its  own  signature,  and  finally  the 
airplane  verifies  owner’s  as  well  as  supplier’s  signatures. 
However,  such  an  approach  may  not  be  scalable  if  the 
airplane  uses  offline 
verification  with  preloaded 
certificates,  since  certificate  management  complexity 
increases  with  the  number  of  suppliers.  Fig.  2  also 
illustrates  that an alternative, scalable approach  is  to have 
the  owner  verify  and  distribute  re-signed  software  parts, 
while  the  airplane  verifies  only  the  owner’s  signature 
against  a  preloaded  certificate.  Unfortunately, 
this 
approach  may  increase  the  overhead  costs  at  the  owner, 
as discussed below. 

3.3.  Reducing Impact of Secure AADS at 
Owner 

The  RTCA  DO-178B  guidance  indicates  that  the  safety-
criticality  of  airplane  loadable  software  may  range  from 
Level  A,  safety-critical,  to  Level  E,  no  safety  impact1. 
However,  AADS  need  not  differentiate  software  based  on 
these  levels, rendering  the same  level of assurance for all. 
With  an  assurance  level  of  CC  EAL6  needed  for  systems 
handling  safety-critical  parts,  it  becomes  necessary  to 
evaluate 
the  entire  AADS  at 
that  assurance 
level. 
Consequently,  the  evaluation  effort,  which  involves  use  of 
formal  methods  in  security  analysis,  incurs  significant 
costs and  time7. For  the approach described above where 

the  owner  removes  supplier  signatures  and  re-signs 
software,  the  evaluation  effort  of  EAL6  is  levied  on  both 
owner and supplier. 

Property 

Intermittent 
Connectivity 

explicitly  acknowledged  the  need  to  secure  the  electronic 
distribution  of  loadable  software11.  On  the  other  hand, 
regulatory  agencies  also  understand  that  the  introduction 
of  digital  certificates  and  cryptographic  keys  in  onboard 
Multiple  
Reduced Impact  
Multiple 
Off-board 
Suppliers 
at Owner 
Systems 

Scheme 
(Signature + Verification on 
airplane) 
√ 
√ 
√ 
× 
Supplier + PKI 
√ 
× 
× 
√ 
Supplier + Preload cert 
× 
√ 
√ 
× 
Owner + PKI 
Owner + Preload cert 
× 
√* 
× 
√ 
Table 1: Comparison of proposed schemes and satisfied AADS properties.  √ - can accommodate. × - not 
guaranteed to accommodate. Scheme specifies the signature verified and verification mechanism at airplane. 
 √* - accommodated if owner verifies supplier signatures using a proper PKI on ground. 

In  order  to  reduce  the  impact  at  the  owner  (constraint  C3 
in  Section  2.1)  a  tradeoff  can  be  achieved  by  having 
owners  retain  supplier  signatures  on  the  safety-critical 
parts,  and  making  airplanes  verify  these  signatures.  This 
approach  reduces  the  security  evaluation  effort  to  a 
manageable  portion,  i.e.  the  system  signing  parts  at 
suppliers  and  the  system  verifying  parts  on  the  airplane. 
The  burden  of  rigorously  evaluating  (at  EAL6)  the  IT 
systems handling safety-critical parts at the airplane owner 
is  eliminated. Another advantage of  the approach  is  that  it 
provides  end-to-end  integrity  and  authenticity  protection 
for  safety-critical  parts.  However,  scalability  issues  with 
use  of  preloaded  certificates  discussed  above  must  be 
addressed  by  the  owner.  Moreover,  this  approach  also 
requires  compliance  and  support  from  all  the  airplane 
loadable software suppliers. 

Table  1  summarizes  the  proposed  approaches  and  the 
AADS  constraints  accommodated  by  each.  It  can  be 
observed  that  each  approach  has  its  tradeoffs.  Overall,  a 
hybrid  solution 
to  secure  AADS  while  meeting 
its 
constraints  can  be  constructed  as  follows:  have  each 
supplier  sign  all  software  parts;  ensure  owners  verify 
supplier  signatures  and  additionally  sign  the  parts;  have 
the  airplane  verify  the  owner  signature,  and  for  safety-
critical parts additionally verify the supplier signature. 

For  verification  of  the  supplier  signed  safety-critical  parts 
at  the  airplane,  use  a  PKI  that  provides  online  verification 
of  certificate  validity,  or  at  least  provides  the  most  recent 
certificate  revocation  lists  to  the  airplane.  In  the  absence 
of  network  connection,  verify  only  the  owner  signatures, 
using pre-loaded certificates. 

Determining  the  set  of  preloaded  certificates  for  verifying 
certificates  from  off-board  systems  connecting  with  the 
airplane remains as a challenging open problem. 

3.4.  Specifying Impact of Security on Airplane 
Safety Regulations and Guidance 

Consistent  with  the  constraint  C4  in  Section  2.1,  the  FAA 
recently  acknowledged 
that  when  onboard  networks 
connect  to  off-board  systems,  the  airplane  effectively 
becomes  a  node  on  the  Internet.  Existing  airworthiness 
regulations do not  include  safety standards  to address  the 
resulting  security  requirements10.  Further, 
they  have 

system  storage  clearly  affects  airplane  operator  guidance. 
We discuss one specific impact next. 

4.  OPEN PROBLEMS AND FUTURE WORK 

4.1. 

Implementing and Evaluating the AADS 

As  noted  in  [2],  Boeing  is  implementing  an  instance  of 
AADS,  called  Boeing  Electronic  Distribution  of  Software 
(BEDS)  system, 
for  secure  electronic  distribution  of 
loadable  software  and data between airplanes and ground 
systems. We are  in  the process of applying our  framework 
to BEDS  for analyzing and exhibiting  the system’s security 
properties.  The  established  CC  Protection  Profile5  will 
enable  us  to  evaluate  BEDS  against  a  specific  CC 
Security  Target  derived 
from 
the  generic  Protection 
Profile.  

4.2.  Airline PKI Requirements 

The  public  key  based  applications  of  eEnabled  airplanes 
levy 
new 
requirements 
on 
airplane 
operators. 
Consequently,  FAA  and  the  European  Aviation  Safety 
Agency  (EASA) have mandated  that operator guidance be 
suitably  modified  to  include  PKI  requirements,  such  as 
management of  certificates  and cryptographic keys.  In our 
on-going  work,  we  are  exploring  airline  PKI  needs  and 
studying  the  applicability  of  solution  approaches,  including 
preloaded  certificates  not  employing  any  trust  chain 
between  them,  and  employment  of  a  proper  PKI. We  also 
intend  to  investigate  evaluation  cost-effective  and  high-
assurance PKI models to support AADS. 

4.3.  Security of Airplane Health Management 
for eEnabled Airplanes 

An unexplored area  in eEnabled airplane  is  the security of 
airplane-generated  data  that  is  distributed  to  ground 
systems.  We  focus  on  the  airplane  health  management 
(AHM)  application2.  In  particular,  we  will  explore  the 
potential  use  of  wireless  sensor  networks  (WSNs)  to 
sense, collect, and  transfer health data, some of which will 
be  distributed  to  off-board  systems  for  analysis.  An  AHM 
WSN  can  offer  significant  advantages 
to  airplane 
operators,  including  enhancing  safety  by  real-time  health 
monitoring  of 
reducing 
flight-critical  systems,  and 
maintenance  costs  and  delays  by  early  detection  of 

[6] 

[3]  S.  Lintelman,  R.  Robinson,  M.  Li,  D.  von  Oheimb,  K. 
Sampigethaya,  and  R.  Poovendran, 
“Security 
Assurance  for  IT  Infrastructure  Supporting  Airplane 
Production,  Maintenance,  and  Operation,”  National 
Systems 
Workshop 
on 
Aviation 
Software 
http://chess.eecs.berkeley.edu/hcssas/papers/Lintelma
n-HCSS-Boeing-Position_092906_ 2.pdf 
(April 2007). 
[4]  Eric  Fleischman,  Randall  E.  Smith,  and  Nick  Multari, 
“Networked  Local  Area  Networks  (LANs)  in  Aircraft:  
Safety,  Security  and  Certification  Issues,  and  Initial 
Acceptance  Criteria  (Phases  1  and  2),”  Final  Report, 
December 2006. 
[5]  R. Robinson, D. von Oheimb, M. Li, K. Sampigethaya, 
R. Poovendran,  “Security Specification  for Distribution 
and  Storage  of  Airplane-Loadable  Software  and 
Airplane-Generated 
Data,” 
Common 
Criteria 
Protection Profile manuscript, available upon request. 
Information  Assurance 
Technical 
Framework, 
Release  3.1.  US  National  Security  Agency. 
http://www.iatf.net/framework_docs/version-3_1/. 
[7]  Common Criteria. 
http://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/  
[8]  C.  Adams  and  S.  Lloyd,  Understanding  PKI: 
Concepts, 
Standards, 
and 
Deployment 
Considerations, 2nd edition, Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
[9]  H.  Cavusoglu,  B.  Mishra,  and  S.  Raghunathan,  “The 
Effect  of  Internet  Security  Breach  Announcements  on 
Market Value of Breached Firms and Internet Security 
Developers,” 
International  Journal  of  Electronic 
Commerce, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2004, pp. 69-105. 
[10] Federal  Aviation  Administration,  14  CFR  Part  25, 
Special  Conditions:  Boeing  Model  787–8  Airplane; 
Systems  and  Data  Networks  Security—Isolation  or 
from  Unauthorized  Passenger  Domain 
Protection 
Systems  Access, 
[Docket  No.  NM364  Special 
Conditions  No.  25–07–01–SC],  Federal  Register, 
Vol. 72, No. 71, April 13, 2007, 
http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2007/pdf/E7-7065.pdf  
[11] Federal  Aviation  Administration,  14  CFR  Part  25, 
Special  Conditions:  Boeing  Model  787–8  Airplane; 
Systems  and  Data  Networks  Security—Protection  of 
Airplane  Systems  and  Data  Networks  From 
Unauthorized  External  Access,  [Docket  No.  NM365 
Special  Conditions  No.  25–07–02–SC],  Federal 
Register, Vol. 72, No. 72, April 16, 2007, 
http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2007/pdf/07-1838.pdf. 
[12] H.  Bai,  M.  Atiquzzaman,  and  D.  Lilja,  “Wireless 
Sensor  Network 
for  Aircraft  Health  Monitoring,” 
Broadband  Networks  (BROADNETS'04),  2004,  pp. 
748 – 750. 
[13] M.  Barbeau,  “WiMax/802.16  threat  analysis,”  ACM 
international  workshop  on  Quality  of  service  & 
security  in  wireless  and  mobile  networks,  Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada, 2005, pp. 8--15. 

onboard  system  failures12.  Another  notable  benefit  is  the 
reduction  in  system  weight  and  costs  associated  with 
onboard  wiring.  In  our  future  work,  we  will  propose  a 
security  framework  to  enable  the  beneficial  use  of  AHM 
WSN.  We  note  that  integration  of  this  framework  with  the 
one  proposed  for  AADS,  offers  end-to-end  security  for 
AHM data. 

4.4.  Security of Air Traffic Management for 
eEnabled Airplanes 

Integration  with  air  traffic  management  (ATM)  centers  is 
another  potential  application  of  eEnabled  airplanes. 
Advances  in  wireless  technologies,  such  as  WiMAX13, 
enable  broadband  point-to-point  connectivity  over  long 
distances  between  airplane  and  ATM  center.  By 
communicating  with  air 
traffic  centers,  an  eEnabled 
airplane  may  not  only  improve  air  traffic  control  efficiency 
and  reduce  flight  delays,  but  also  automate  processes 
prone  to  human  errors  (e.g.  landing  in  low  visibility 
conditions).  Based  on  the  security  framework  proposed  in 
this  paper, we will  study  the  security  of  ATM  for  eEnabled 
airplanes.  However,  unique  security  challenges  arise  due 
to  application  constraints  such  as  online  connection 
between in-flight airplanes and the traffic centers. 

5.  CONCLUSION 

This  paper  focused  on  securing  the  electronic  distribution 
of airplane  loadable software. We  identified  two classes of 
threats,  to  airplane  safety  and  to  the  business  of  airplane 
owners.  After  specifying  security 
requirements,  we 
proposed  use  of  digital  signatures  for  end-to-end  integrity 
and  authenticity  of  software  distributed  from  a  supplier  to 
an  airplane.  We  presented 
the  main  challenges 
to 
securing  the  electronic  distribution  of  airplane  software, 
and  suggested  a  suitable  architecture  that  addresses 
these  challenges.  The  results  of  our  work  have  profound 
implications 
for  security  of  other  potential  eEnabled 
airplane applications, ranging from integration with ground-
based maintenance  information  systems  for  flight  logistics 
and maintenance,  to  interoperability with  air  traffic  control. 
Identifying  criteria  that  regulatory  agencies  must  adopt  or 
recommend  with  respect  to  the  security  of  eEnabled 
airplane applications, remains an open problem. 

6.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We  would  like  to  thank  Prof.  Peter  Hartmann  from  the 
Landshut  University  of  Applied  Sciences  for  his  insightful 
and valuable comments  that helped us  to  improve specific 
sections of this paper. 

7.  REFERENCES 
[1]  DO-178B:  Software  Considerations 
in  Airborne 
and  Equipment  Certification.  Radio 
Systems 
Technical  Commission 
for  Aeronautics 
(RTCA) 
(1992). 
[2]  G.  Bird,  M.  Christensen,  D.  Lutz,  and  P.  Scandura, 
“Use  of  integrated  vehicle  health  management  in  the 
field  of  commercial  aviation,”  NASA  ISHEM  Forum, 
2005. 

