Computer Networks 55 (2011) 1455–1458

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Networks

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / c o m n e t

Editorial
Recent Advances in Network Convergence

Recent years have witnessed an increasing trend to-
wards the convergence of networks, services, and applica-
tions.
In contrast to a telecommunications landscape
where different services are delivered through separate ac-
cess technologies, each tailored to a speciﬁc application,
network convergence aims at providing a uniﬁed network
platform for the efﬁcient coexistence of previously distinct
media accessible through common interfaces on single de-
vices. The convergence trend is further stressed by users’
increasing demand for ubiquitous access to any service
anytime, anywhere and on any device. This, however, im-
plies that one device should be able to connect with a mul-
titude of specialized services, access technologies, and
possibly different network operators as illustrated in Fig. 1.
As network convergence involves many different par-
ties, its technical and economical success depends on the
ability to agree on a common set of standard interfaces.
Moreover, the convergence of different access technologies
along with users’ increasing mobility and demand for con-
nectivity at all times at high data rates raise the need for
new monitoring, control and management approaches
essential for providing converged services with quality-
of-experience (QoE) assurance. At the same time, network
convergence is expected to serve as an enabler for new
business models for network operators and service provid-
ers, a means to reduce operations and management costs,
and a platform for faster deployment of new multimedia
applications. Convergence attracted even more interest
with the advent of Cloud Computing in the recent few
years where a converged view of infrastructure is emerg-
ing in which all resources whether computing, storage or
networking are viewed as being part of shareable resource
pools that can be controlled and managed using the same
systems. The converged infrastructure is envisioned to
encompass remote datacenters, dense small-cell wireless
access integrated with optical backhaul where the tradi-
tional point-to-point backhauling may be partly replaced
by multi-point technologies, and deployment of a Future
Internet architecture. The realization of this vision how-
ever faces many technical challenges that need to be ad-
dressed in order to ensure failsafe network operations, to
efﬁciently support user mobility, and to guarantee QoE.
This special issue has as its main purposes the presen-
tation of recent developments in the area of network

1389-1286/$ - see front matter Ó 2011 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2011.04.002

convergence, and providing a view of the ﬁeld’s state-of-
the-art today. It is composed of eleven papers selected
from 50 submissions. The contributions span IP multime-
dia subsystems
(IMS), media independent handover
(MIH), ﬁxed-mobile convergence, convergence of different
wireless standards, vertical handover, quality-of-service
(QoS) and QoE, and convergence in the network core.
QoE is the ultimate measure of user satisfaction. In the
paper ‘‘QoE assurance in converged networks.’’, R. Stan-
kiewicz and A. Jajszczyk discuss several quality measures,
speciﬁcally QoS, Grade-of-Service (GoS), and Quality-of-
Resilience (QoR), and their impact on QoE assurance in
converged networking environments. The authors focus
on convergence between ﬁxed and wireless as well as con-
vergence between heterogeneous wireless technologies,
and elaborate on the requirements for any service, any-
where, anytime and on any device.
The IP multimedia subsystem (IMS), standardized by
3GPP, plays a key role in network convergence and pro-
vides a platform for converged voice, video, and data-
applications over ﬁxed and mobile networks based on IP.
In the paper ‘‘TRIM: An architecture for transparent IMS-
based mobility,’’ I. Vidal, A. de la Oliva, J. Garcia-Reinoso
and I. Soto consider IP mobility in IMS networks and show
how a new architecture called TRIM extends mobile termi-
nals such that seamless IMS-based mobility can be pro-
vided transparently to end-user applications. TRIM
support for mobility is evaluated on the basis of an IMS
test-bed with 3G and WLAN access networks.
The transition towards new mobile communication
standards is characterized by the co-existence of different
wireless standards such as GSM and UMTS in addition to
3GPP LTE and IEEE 802.16 during the roll-out of 4G net-
works. This problem is addressed in the paper ‘‘Reinforce-
ment learning for joint radio resource management in LTE-
UMTS scenarios.’’ by N. Vucevic, J. Pérez-Romero, O. Sal-
lent, and R. Agustı´ . In particular, the authors consider the
convergence of 3G and 4G networks using the example
of co-existing UMTS and LTE technologies and present a
dynamic joint radio resource management algorithm span-
ning both technologies. Based on a reinforcement learning
technique, the algorithm determines the most appropriate
Radio Access Technology for user sessions in a multi-
service scenario under dynamic conditions. The low

1456

Editorial / Computer Networks 55 (2011) 1455–1458

Fig. 1. Typical wireless and ﬁxed networks involved in network convergence.

complexity of the proposed algorithm makes it a likely
candidate for implementation in real-time systems.
Co-existence and convergence of different mobile access
technologies implies the need for seamless handover be-
tween these technologies commonly referred to as vertical
handover. IEEE 802.21 provides a standard framework for
vertical handover and deﬁnes the mechanisms of media
independent handover. In the paper ‘‘Context-aware media
independent information server for optimized seamless
handover procedures.’’ P. Neves, J. Soares, S. Sargento, H.
Pires, and F. Fontes consider vertical handover between
IEEE 802.11 (WiFi), IEEE 802.16 (WiMax), 3GPP UMTS,
HSPA, and LTE. Their proposal extends IEEE 802.21 media
independent handover by introducing a context manage-
ment server used to dynamically acquire and maintain
information from the network and the mobile terminals
such as the number of and requirements of currently run-
ning services, established radio bearers, user preferences,
and others. The context information is then exploited to
optimize the handover process, e.g., the handover duration.
On a similar topic, the paper ‘‘Autonomic personalized
handover decisions for mobile services in heterogeneous
wireless networks.’’ by J.-M. Kang, J. Strassner, S.-S. Seo,
J.W.-K. Hong focuses on personalized and automated verti-
cal handover decisions in heterogeneous mobile networks.
In this proposal, the handover is not solely based on the
signal strength but considers two additional metrics: the
access-point-acceptance
and
access-point-satisfaction.
The former is a vector of individual channel quality mea-
sures such as delay and power consumption, and the latter
combines these individual measures based on the user’s
needs. Accordingly, the access point which maximizes

these metrics and thereby user satisfaction is selected.
The proposal is evaluated through simulations and com-
pared to other decision metrics.
While previous contributions consider the co-existence
of different mobile communication standards, the paper
‘‘Vertical handovers among different wireless technologies
in a UMTS radio access-based integrated architecture’’ by N.
Vulic, S.M. Heemstra de Groot, I.G. Niemegeers extends the
problem to the co-existence of mobile access technologies
and broadcast systems. In particular, the authors focus on
the integration of UMTS, IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.16, and
DVB-H at the radio access level. The authors describe the
necessary handover mechanisms and conduct performance
evaluations for different vertical handover scenarios.
Heterogeneous wired/wireless networks rely on com-
plex wired mesh backbones with gateway nodes connect-
ing to the Internet. These gateway nodes act as converging
points for heterogeneous network trafﬁc heading to and
from the Internet and can turn into bottlenecks once their
resources are exhausted. In this context, the paper ‘‘Re-
source competition in a converged heterogeneous net-
working ecosystem.’’ by A. Jamalipour, F. Javadi, and K.S.
Munasinghe asks the important question of how a system
can maintain stability over a period of time in a resource
diminishing environment, provided the resources are fairly
allocated at the time of admission. To answer this ques-
tion, the authors conduct an ecologically inspired analysis
where the converged heterogeneous network is modeled
as an ecosystem of diverse networks with limited resource
constraints and competing communication sessions. Based
on the result of their analysis and the key observation
of competitive exclusion between sessions, the authors

Editorial / Computer Networks 55 (2011) 1455–1458

1457

propose a novel admission control policy to allow fair co-
existence among sessions.
In the paper ‘‘Evaluation of two integrated signaling
schemes for the Ultra Flat Architecture using SIP, IEEE
802.21, and HIP/PMIP protocols.’’ Z. Faigl, L. Bokor, P.M.
Neves, K. Daoud, and P. Herbelin discuss a new network
architecture, called UFA (Ultra Flat Architecture), which
distributes some of the core network (e.g., 3GPP) functions
to the edge (close to the base stations) in order to better
scale to the ever growing trafﬁc demand. Speciﬁcally the
paper extends UFA with support for non-SIP based applica-
tions for more ﬂexibility in converged networks as well as
legacy Internet applications including IMS compliant
applications.
The heterogeneous landscape of wireless access tech-
nologies does not only imply the necessity of co-existence
but also provides the possibility to integrate different ac-
cess technologies using the same infrastructure. This not
only relates to the radio access but also to the core net-
work, which may be shared by different operators. In
‘‘On the role of infrastructure sharing for mobile network
operators in emerging markets.’’ D.-E. Meddour, T. Ras-
heed, and Y. Gourhant discuss the different options of
infrastructure sharing their implications and potential
savings of operational expenditures (OPEX) as well as cap-
ital expenditures (CAPEX) under technical, practical and
regulatory constraints.
The clustering and ﬁxed allocation of the available spec-
trum over the years has resulted in an inefﬁcient use of the
scarce spectral resources. To alleviate this problem, dy-
namic spectrum management techniques such as cognitive
radio have received a lot of attention recently. B. Ishibashi,
N. Bouabdallah, and R. Boutaba in their paper ‘‘QoS Capac-
ity of Virtual Wireless Networks’’, introduce the concept of
Virtual Wireless Networks (VWNs) created and operated
without obtaining any dedicated spectrum resources of
their own. VWNs exploit residual bandwidth left underuti-
lized by licensed users. However, it is unclear whether
VWNs can provide QoS guarantees since the residual re-
sources can be reclaimed anytime by the primary users.
The authors extend a classical wireless system with
cognitive radio capabilities and use Markov chain-based
analysis and simulations to demonstrate that VWNs are
indeed capable of providing QoS and allowing for new ser-
vices provided by virtual wireless operators.
In the last paper presented in this special issue ‘‘SWISH:
Secure WiFi Sharing.’’, D. Leroy, G. Detal, J. Cathalo, M.
Manulis, F. Koeune, and O. Bonaventure present an efﬁ-
cient and fully deployed solution, SWISH, enabling secure
WiFi sharing with visiting mobile users. The key motiva-
tion behind the development of SWISH is to enable mobile
users to connect to the Internet via a nearby foreign net-
work without jeopardizing the security of the visited net-
work. There exist
indeed many WiFi networks with
unused resources, which visiting mobile users can use to
connect to the Internet if the owners of these networks
were not reluctant due to security concerns. Using crypto-
graphic authentication of the involved parties (mobile
user, her/his home network and the visited WiFi network),
the authors demonstrate how WiFi networks can be fully
secured with minimal impact on their performance which

is demonstrated by deploying and testing their solution in
a production campus network.
In presenting these diverse research efforts on converg-
ing communication systems and services, we hope to
provide some possible directions to future network con-
vergence research and to excite future research explora-
tions in this promising ﬁeld. It is also our hope that the
selected papers have shown to you, the readers, the
breadth and depth of the challenges we face and the exis-
tence of many open research issues.
We express our gratitude to the Editor-in-Chief, Dr.
Harry Rudin, for giving us the opportunity to put together
this special issue, and for his continuous support through-
out this project from establishing a successful call for pa-
pers to the time-consuming editorial work he put on
each accepted paper. We also express our thanks to the
many authors who responded to the call for papers. We
are particularly grateful to the authors of the four invited
papers for kindly agreeing to write papers: A. Jajszczyk,
A. Jamalipour, D.-E. Meddour, J. W.-K. Hong and their co-
authors. All the papers went through a rigorous review
process and we are grateful to the many obliging reviewers
whose timely efforts were essential for the selection of the
papers. As much as we enjoyed working on this special is-
sue, we hope you will enjoy reading it.

Peter Rost received his Ph.D. degree in elec-
trical engineering from Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden, Germany, in 2009 and his
M.Sc. degree in information technology from
University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, in
2005.
From 1999 to 2002, he was with Fraunhofer
Institute for Beam and Material Technolo-
gies, Dresden, Germany where he developed
augmented and virtual reality based con-
trolling systems. From 2002 to 2005 he was
with IBM Deutschland Entwicklung GmbH,
Böblingen, Germany, where he contributed to the IBM Tivoli system. In
June 2005 he joined the Vodafone Chair of Prof. Gerhard Fettweis at
Technische Universität Dresden and focused on different aspects of
relaying in the context of mobile communications systems. He was also
a leading member of the organizing team of IEEE ICC 2009, prepared
multiple successful EU FP6 and FP7 proposals, and was actively con-
tributing to the European research project WINNER since 2005 as task
leader. Since April 2010 Peter is member of the Mobile and Wireless
Networks group at NEC Laboratories Europe, where he is working in BU
projects as well as the EU FP7 project FLAVIA.
Currently, he is conference coordinator of the ﬁrst IEEE online conference
(2010 IEEE Online Conference on Green Communications). He published
30 + contributions to books, journals, conferences, and public project
reports, and he is author of multiple patents and patent applications.

Raouf Boutaba received the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in computer science from the Uni-
versity Pierre & Marie Curie, Paris, in 1990
and 1994, respectively. He is currently a pro-
fessor of computer science at the University of
Waterloo (Canada) and a distinguished visit-
ing professor in the division of IT convergence
engineering at POSTECH (Korea). His research
interests include network, resource and ser-
vice management in wired, and wireless net-
works. He is the founding editor in chief of the
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
Management (2007–2010) and on the editorial boards of other journals.
He has received several best paper awards and other recognitions such as
the Premier’s Research Excellence Award, the IEEE Hal Sobol Award in

1458

Editorial / Computer Networks 55 (2011) 1455–1458

2007, the Fred W. Ellersick Paper Prize in 2008, the Joe LociCero award
and the Dan Stokesbury in 2009.

Klaus Doppler received his Ph.D. degree in
Electrical Engineering from Aalto University
School of Science and Technology, Helsinki,
Finland,
in 2010 and his M.Sc. degree in
Electrical Engineering from Graz University of
Technology, Austria, in 2003.
He joined Nokia Research Center in 2002.
Currently he is leading the Wireless Systems
team of the Radio Systems Laboratory in
Berkeley, California. He has been leading and
contributing to research activities on the
design and integration of novel radio concepts
into cellular systems, including device-to-device communication, (coop-
erative) relaying and multiband operation. He was among the top ten
inventors in Nokia in the years 2008–2009 and received a Nokia top
inventor award in the years 2007–2008.He has been the proof-of-concept
subtask leader within the relaying task of the European research project
WINNER II and he has been leading the device-to-device communication
and network coding task within WINNER+. He has authored and co-
authored 25 + conference and journal articles, two book chapters and
more than 40 pending patent applications.

Ashwin Gumaste is currently the James R.
Isaac Chair and faculty member
in the
Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering at the Indian Institute of Technology
(IIT) Bombay. He is currently also a consultant
to Nokia Siemens Networks, Munich where he
works on optical access
standardization
efforts. He was a Visiting Scientist with the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
Cambridge, USA in the Research Laboratory
for Electronics from 2008 to 2010. He was
previously with Fujitsu Laboratories (USA) Inc
in the Photonics Networking Laboratory (2001–05). He has also worked in
Fujitsu Network Communications R&D (in Richardson TX) and prior to

that with Cisco Systems in the Optical Networking Group (ONG). His
work on light-trails has been widely referred, deployed and recognized by
both industry and academia. His recent work on Omnipresent Ethernet
has been adopted by tier-1 service providers. Ashwin has 20 granted US
patents and over 30 pending patent applications. Ashwin has published
about 120 papers in referred conferences and journals. He has also
authored three books in broadband networks called DWDM Network
Designs and Engineering Solutions (a networking bestseller), First-Mile
Access Networks and Enabling Technologies and Broadband Services:
User Needs, Business Models and Technologies for John Wiley. Owing to
his many research achievements and contributions, Ashwin was awarded
the Government of India’s DAE-SRC Outstanding Research Investigator
Award in 2010 as well as the Indian National Academy of Engineering’s
(INAE) Young Engineer Award (2010). He has served Program Chair, Co-
chair, Publicity chair and workshop chair for IEEE conferences and as
Program Committee member for IEEE ICC, Globecom, OFC, ICCCN, Grid-
nets etc. Ashwin is also a guest editor for IEEE Communications Magazine,
IEEE Network and the founding Editor of the IEEE ComSoc ONTC’s
newsletter Prism. He is the Chair of theIEEE Communication Society’s
Technical Committee on High Speed Networks (TCHSN) 2011–2013. He
has been with IIT Bombay since 2005 where he convenes Networking
Laboratory (GNL): www.cse.iitb.ac.in/gnl. The Gigabit Networking Labo-
ratory has secured over 8 million USD in funding since its inception and
has been involved in 4 major technology transfers to the industry. Ashwin
can be reached through www.ashwin.name.

P. Rost
R. Boutaba
K. Doppler
A. Gumaste

