                     Volume 2, Issue 4, April 2012                   ISSN: 2277 128X 
International Journal of Advanced Research in 
 Computer Science and Software Engineering 
                                                   Research Paper 
                             Available online at: www.ijarcsse.com 
Research Issues in Wireless Networks 
                                    
    Raj Kumar Singh1                                                            Dr.A.K.Jain2                                                          
             Professor & Head  
             M.Tech. (2nd yr)                                         
                             Department of Instrumentation & Control                                              Department of Instrumentation & Control                                                 
        Dr. B.R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology              Dr. B.R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology 
     
            Jalandhar, Punjab (India)       
 
 
        Jalandhar, Punjab (India)                                                                   
                                         rajmtechnit@gmail.com               
               jainak@nitj.ac.in 
 
 
 

Abstract— The arrival of wireless technology has reduced the human efforts for accessing data at various loca tions by replacing wired 
infrastructure with wireless infrastructure and also providing access to devices having mobility.Since wireless devices need to be small 
and  bandwidth  constrained,  some  of  the  key  challenges  in  wireless  networks  are  Signal  fading,  mobility,  data  rate  enhancements, 
minimizing size and cost, user security and (Quality of service) QoS. This paper is intended to provide the reader with an overview of 
the Research Issues and Challenges in wireless networks. 
Keywords— Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs), IEEE 802.11, Quality of Service (QoS). 
 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

II.  TAXONOMY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 

The  explosive  growth  in  wireless  networks  over  the  last 
few years resembles the rapid growth of the internet within the 
last  decade.  Wireless  communication  continues  to  enjoy 
exponential growth  in  the  cellular  telephony, wireless  internet 
and  wireless  home  networking  arenas.  With  advent  of 
Wireless LAN (WLAN) technology, computer networks could 
achieve  connectivity  with  a  useable  amount  of  bandwidth 
without  being  networked  via  a  wall  socket.  New  generations 
of  handheld  devices  allowed  users  access  to  stored  data  even 
when they travel. Users could set their laptops down anywhere 
and  instantly  be  granted  access  to  all  networking  resources. 
This  was,  and  is,  the  vision  of  wireless  networks,  and  what 
they are capable of delivering. Today, while wireless networks 
[1]  have  seen widespread  adoption  in  the  home  user  markets, 
widely  reported  and  easily  exploited  holes  in  the  standard 
security  system  have  stunted  wireless  deployment  rate  in 
enterprise  environments.  Over  time,  it  became  apparent  that 
some  form  of  security was  required  to  prevent  outsiders  from 
exploiting  the  connected  resources.  We  believe  that  the 
current  wireless  access  points  present  a  larger  security 
problem  than  the  early  lntemet connections.  As more wireless 
technology  is  wireless  technology,  this  will  be  a  good 
stepping-stone  for  providing  a  good  secure  solution  to  any 
wireless solution.  
The  rest  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows;  firstly  we 
present  the  taxonomy  of  wireless  networks  and  giving  the 
discussion  of  the  two  operating  modes  of  the  IEEE  802.11  in 
second  section.  We  then  provide  a  brief  overview  about 
Research  Challenges  and  Issues  of  Wireless  Networks  in 
section  third.  And  finally  the  section  fourth  gives  the 
conclusion of the whole paper. 

 
The  distinguishing  feature  of  wireless  networks  is  that 
packets  (segments)  are  transmitted  with  the  presence  of 
wireless  links.  A  device  can  send  messages  in  a  wireless 
network  via  the  wireless  medium,  air,  to  another  device 
provided  that  the  receiver  is  within  the  transmission  range  of 
the  sender.  This  adds  flexibility  to  how  a  wireless  network  is 
formed and structured. Besides, it supports device mobility. 

                           IEEE 802.11 

 

IEEE  802.11  is  a  basic  standard  for  Wireless  Local  Area 
Network (WLAN) communication. IEEE 802.11 standard was 
first introduced in 1997. It was envisioned for home and office 
environments for wireless local area connectivity and supports 
three  types  of  transmission  technologies  namely  i)  Infrared 
(IR),  ii)  Frequency  Hopping  Spread  Spectrum  (FHSS),  iii) 
Direct  Sequence  Spread  Spectrum  (DSSS).  In  1999  two  other 
transmission 
technologies  were 
included  Orthogonal 
Frequency  Division  Multiplexing  (OFDM)  and  High  Rate 
Direct  Sequence  Spread  Spectrum  (HR-DSSS).  The  second 
OFDM  modulation  scheme  was  introduced  in  2001  for  high 
data rates [2]. The standard introduces two operating modes of 
wireless networks, namely, the infrastructure networks and the 
ad hoc networks. 
 

A.  Infrastructured Networks 

 
The infrastructure operating mode (Fig 1) is a network with 
an  Access  Point  (AP),  in  which  all  STAs  must  be  associated 

© 2012, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                                     Page | 115 

 
 

Volume 2, Issue 4, April 2012                                                                                                                               www.ijarcsse.com 

with  an  AP  to  access  the  network.  STAs  communicate  with 
each  other  through  the  AP.  An  infrastructured  one  with 
planned,  permanent  network  device  installations.  It  can  be  set 
up with a fixed topology, to which a wireless host can connect 
via  a  fixed  point,  known  as  a  base  station  or  an  access  point. 
The  latter  is  connected  to  the  backbone  network,  often  via  a 
wired  link.  Cellular  networks  [3]  and  most  of  the  wireless 
local  area  networks  (WLANs)  [4]  operate  as  the  static 
infrastructured  networks.  All  wireless  hosts  within 
the 
transmission coverage of the base station can connect to it and 
use it to communicate with the backbone network. This means 
that  all  communications  initiated  from  or  destined  to  a 
wireless  host  have  to  pass  through  the  base  station  to  which 
the  host  connects  directly.  In  addition,  an  infra-structured 
network is also be established with a quasi-static or a dynamic 
topology.  A  satellite  network  [5]  belongs  to  this  category.  It 
has  a  space  segment  and  a  ground  segment.  The  space 
segment  comprises  of  satellites.  The  ground  segment  has  a 
number of base stations, also known as gateway stations (GSs), 
through which all communications via long-haul satellite links 
take  place.  The  base  station,  or  access  point,  is  a  critical 
element for communication.  
 
 

directly whenever  the  receiver  is  in  its  transmission  coverage. 
If a wireless host would  like  to  send messages  to another host 
which is not in the coverage region, it will first relay them to a 
host  in  its  transmission  range. The host  functions as a  relay  to 
forward  the messages on  its way  to  the destination. The major 
advantage  of  this  configuration  is  flexibility.  An  ad-  hoc 
network  can  be  built  easily,  without  the  need  of  any  preset, 
fixed  infrastructure.  In  addition,  an  ad  hoc  network  is 
generally  more  robust  than  an  infrastructured  network  as  it 
does  not  have  any  critical  device  to  maintain  the  network 
connectivity.  In  other words,  it  is  unlikely  an  ad  hoc  network 
will be partitioned due to the failure of a wireless host, but the 
malfunction  of  a  base  station  may  partition  an  infrastructure 
network,  blocking  the  communication  between  all  wireless 
hosts  connecting  to  the  failed  base  station  and  all  other  hosts 
in the network. However, there are some drawbacks for ad hoc 
networks.  First,  it  is  much  more  difficult  and  complex  to 
perform  routing  in  ad  hoc  networks  because  of  frequent 
changes in the network topology due to host mobility.  
 
 

 

Fig. 1 Infrastructure wireless network 

 

 
To  maintain  an  ongoing  connection  when  a  mobile  host 
moves  away  from  the  coverage  of  its  base  station,  a  terminal 
handoff  occurs  such  that  a  mobile  host  hands  over  its  proxy 
for  communication  from  one  base  station  to  another  one. 
Whenever  the  coverages  of  several  neighboring  base  stations 
overlap with  each  other,  a mobile  host may  connect  to  one  of 
the reachable base stations based on certain criteria. 
 

B.  Ad Hoc Networks 

 
The  second  operating  mode,  the  independent  mode  or  the 
ad hoc mode (Fig 2) is used if there are no Access Points (APs) 
in  the network.  In  this mode, Stations  (STAs) form an Ad hoc 
network directly with each other.An ad hoc network, such as a 
packet  radio  network,  is  one  without  a  fixed  topology.  A 
wireless  host  can  freely  communicate  with  another  host 

 

Fig. 2 Ad Hoc wireless network 

 

 
Second,  it  is  more  difficult  to  control  or  coordinate  proper 
operation  of  an  ad  hoc  network,  since  each wireless  host may 
have  its  own  algorithms  to  perform  activities  such  as  time 
synchronization,  power  management,  and  packet  scheduling. 
In  an  infra  structured  network,  these  algorithms  are  often 
implemented  in  and  thus  harmonized  by  the  base  stations  or 
access points. 
 

III. RESEARCH  CHALLENGES OF WIRELESS 
NETWORKS 

 
Since  wireless  devices  need  to  be  small  and  wireless 
networks are bandwidth limited, some of the key challenges in 
wireless  networks  are  data  rate  enhancements,  minimizing 
size, cost,  low power networking, user security and Quality of 
Service (QoS). 
 

A.  Signal Fading 

 
Unlike  wired  media,  signals  transmitted  over  a  wireless 
medium  may  be  distorted  or  weakened  because  they  are 

© 2012, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                                     Page | 116 
 

Volume 2, Issue 4, April 2012                                                                                                                               www.ijarcsse.com 

propagated  over  an  open,  unprotected,  and  ever  changing 
medium  with  irregular  boundary.  Besides,  the  same  signal 
may  disperse  and  travel  on  different  paths  due  to  reflection, 
diffraction, and scattering caused by obstacles before it arrives 
at  the  receiver.  The  dispersed  signals  on  different  paths  may 
take different times to reach the destination.Thus, the resultant 
signal  after  summing  up  all  dispersed  signals  may  have  been 
significantly distorted and attenuated when compared with  the 
transmitted  signal.  The  receiver  may  not  recognize  the  signal 
and  hence  the  transmitted  data  cannot  be  received.  This 
unreliable  nature  of  the  wireless  medium  causes  a  substantial 
number of packet losses. 
 

B.  Mobility 

 
Without  the  constraints  imposed  by  the  wired  connections 
among  devices,  all  devices  in  a  wireless  network  are  free  to 
move.  To  support  mobility,  an  ongoing  connection  should  be 
kept  alive  as  a  user  roams  around.  In  an  infrastructured 
network, a handoff occurs when a mobile host moves from the 
coverage  of  a  base  station  or  access  point  to  that  of  another 
one.  A  protocol  is  therefore  required  to  ensure  seamless 
transition  during  a  handoff.  This  includes  deciding  when  a 
handoff  should  occur  and  how  data  is  routed  during  the 
handoff  process.  In  some  occasions,  packets  are  lost  during  a 
handoff.  In  an  ad  hoc  network,  the  topology  changes  when  a 
mobile  host  moves.  This  means  that,  for  an  ongoing  data 
communication,  the  transmission  route  may  need  to  be 
recomputed  to,  cater  for  the  topological  changes.  Since  an  ad 
hoc  network  may  consist  of  a  large  number  of  mobile  hosts, 
this  imposes  a  significant  challenge  on  the  design  of  an 
effective  and  efficient  routing  protocol  that  can  work  well  in 
an environment with frequent topological changes. 
 

C.  Power and Energy   

 
A  mobile  device  is  generally  handy,  small  in  size,  and 
dedicated  to  perform  a  certain  set  of  functions;  its  power 
source  may  not  be  able  to  deliver  power  as  much  as  the  one 
installed  in  a  fixed  device.When  a  device  is  allowed  to  move 
freely,  it  would  generally  be  hard  to  receive  a  continuous 
supply of power. To  conserve  energy,  a mobile  device  should 
be  able  to  operate  in  an  effective  and  efficient manner.  To  be 
specific,  it  should  be  able  to  transmit  and  receive  in  an 
intelligent  manner  so  as 
the  number  of 
to  minimize 
transmissions  and  receptions  for  certain  communication 
operations [7]. 
 

D.  Data Rate 

 
Improving  the  current  data  rates  to  support  future  high 
speed  applications  is  essential,  especially,  if  multimedia 
service  are  to  be  provided.  Data  rate  is  a  function  of  various 
factors  such  as  the  data  compression  algorithm,  interference 
mitigation  through  error-resilient  coding,  power  control,  and 

the  data  transfer  protocol.  Therefore,  it  is  imperative  that 
manufacturers  implement  a  well  thought  out  design  that 
considers  these  factors  in  order  to  achieve  higher  data  rates. 
Data  compression  plays  a  major  role  when  multimedia 
applications such as video conferencing are to be supported by 
a  wireless  network.  Currently,  compression  standards  such  as 
MPEG-4 produce compression ratios of the order of 75 to 100. 
The  challenge  now  is  to  improve  these  data  compression 
algorithms  to  produce  high  quality  audio  and  video  even  at 
these  compression  rates.  Unfortunately,  highly  compressed 
multimedia  data  is  more  sensitive  to  network  errors  and 
interference  and  this  necessitates  the  use  of  algorithms  to 
protect  sensitive  data  from  being  corrupted.  Efficient  error 
control  algorithms  with  low  overhead  must  be  explored. 
Another  way  to  enhance  the  data  rates  would  be  to  employ 
intelligent  data  transfer  protocols  that  adapt  to  the  time-
varying network and traffic characteristics. 
 

E.  Security  

 
Security  is a big concern  in wireless networking, especially 
in m-commerce  and  e-commerce  applications  [8]. Mobility of 
users  increases  the  security  concerns  in  a  wireless  network. 
Current  wireless  networks  employ  authentication  and  data 
encryption  techniques  on  the  air  interface  to  provide  security 
to  its  users.  The  IEEE  801.11  standard  [2]  describes  wired 
equivalent  privacy 
(WEP) 
that  defines  a  method 
to 
authenticate  users  and  encrypt  data  between  the  PC  card  and 
the  wireless  LAN  access  point.  In  large  enterprises,  an  IP 
network  level  security  [9]  solution  could  ensure  that  the 
corporate  network  and  proprietary  data  are  safe.  Virtual 
private  network  (VPN)  is  an  option  to  make  access  to  fixed 
access  networks  reliable.  Since  hackers  are  getting  smarter,  it 
is  imperative  that  wireless  security  features  must  be  updated 
constantly [10]. 
 

F.  (Quality of Service) QoS  

 
Quality  of  Service  is  a  measure  of  network  performance 
that  reflects  the  network's  transmission  quality  and  service 
availability.  For  each  flow  of  network  traffic,  QoS  can  be 
characterized  by  four  parameters:  Reliability,  Delay,  Jitter, 
and Bandwidth. 
 
There  are  several  important  issues  related  to  QoS  in 
wireless  networks  that  do  not  get  addressed  in  the  wireline 
environment. These issues arise because wireless networks are 
inherently different from wireline networks. Several important 
wireless  network  characteristics  include  handoff,  dynamic 
connections, and actuating  transport QoS [11].The  traffic QoS 
parameters  (throughput,  delay  and  loss  rate)  are  not  sufficient 
in  a  wireless  environment.  In  a  wireline  environment,  the 
application  layer  can  normally  be  assured  that  once  a 
connection  is  established  it  will  continue  to  exist  until  it  is 
closed. 
In  a  wireless  environment,  connections  may 
temporarily  break  during  a  process  termed  handoff  [12].  It  is 

© 2012, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                                     Page | 117 
 

Volume 2, Issue 4, April 2012                                                                                                                               www.ijarcsse.com 

unlikely  that  handoff  can  take  place  without  at  least  a  short 
connection  interruption.  Applications  running  in  a  wireless 
environment  must  be  able 
to  recover  from 
temporary 
interruptions,  and  should  specify  the  maximum  connection 
interruption  time  that  they  can  tolerate.  The  application  could 
specify  such  a  time  via  a  large  loss  rate;  however,  this would 
overload  the  meaning  of  loss  rate.  Loss  rate  should  only 
reflect  losses due  to buffer  overflow or  transmission  errors. A 
maximum  frequency  of  connection  interruption  is  another 
performance  parameter  that  would  be  valuable  in  a  wireless 
network.  Some  applications  may  request  a  low  interruption 
frequency  so  that  the  QoS  perceived  by  the  user  remains 
satisfactory.  For  example,  an  application  may  wish  to 
guarantee  that  a  voice  connection  will  not  be  broken  more 
than  once  per  minute.  A  low  interruption  frequency  implies 
that handoffs do not occur  too often. Applications may accept 
a  larger  maximum  connection  interruption  time  in  exchange 
for a low interruption frequency. For example, it may be more 
desirable to have infrequent long breaks in a video connection, 
rather than frequent smaller breaks.  
 

IV. CONCLUSION 

 
This  paper  identifies  and  describes  the  various  research 
issues and challenges available in the wireless domain. We fist 
presented  an  overview  of  the  taxonomy  of  wireless  network.  
We presented an overview of a comprehensive  list of research 
issues  and  challenges  of  the  wireless  network  like  signal 
fading  problem  ,  mobility  problem  ,power  and  energy  ,  data 
rate  enhancement,  security  and  the  quality  of  service  issues 
problems  of  the  wireless  networks  .In  addition  the  popularity 
of  wireless  networks  growing  at  a  exponential  rate,  the  data 
rate  enhancements,  minimizing  size,  cost, 
low  power 
networking,  user  security  and  the  best  requirement  to  obtain 
the required QoS problems becomes more challenging. 
 
In  conclusion,  wireless  networks  are  rapidly  becoming 
popular,  and  user  demand  for  useful  wireless  applications  is 
increasing. By  successfully  addressing  the  issues  presented  in 
this paper, end users will not be disappointed. 
 

REFRENCES 

 
[1]  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wireless_network 
[2] 
IEEE  802.11-1999,  IEEE  Standard  for  Local  and 
Metropolitan  Area  Networks  Specific  Requirements  – 
Part  11: Wireless  LAN Medium  Access  Control  (MAC) 
and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, June 12, 1999. 
[3]  V.O.K.  Li  and  X.  Qiu,  ―Personal  Communication 
Systems (PCS),‖ Proc. IEEE, vol. 83, no. 9, Sept. 1995,  
[4]  J.H.Schiller, Mobile Communications, 2nd  ed., Addison-
Wesley, 2003. 
[5]  Y.  Hu  and  V.O.K.  Li,  ―Satellite-Based  Internet:  A 
Tutorial,‖  IEEE  Commun.  Mag.,  vol.  39,  no.  3,  Mar. 
2001, pp. 154–62. 

[6]  A.Gupta, I. Wormsbecker, and C. Williamson, 
―Experimental Evaluation of TCP Performance in Multi-
Hop Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,‖ Proc. IEEE 
MASCOTS 2004, Volendam, The Netherlands, 4–8 Oct. 
2004, pp. 3–11. 
[7]  H.  Singh  and  S.  Singh,  ―Energy  Consumption  of  TCP 
Reno,  Newreno,  and  SACK  in  Multi-Hop  Wireless 
Networks,‖  ACM  SIGMETRICS  Perf.  Evaluation  Rev., 
vol. 30, no. 1, June 2002, pp. 206-216. 
[8]  Chip  Craig  J.  Mathias  Principal,  Farpoint  Group 
COMNET  2003  ―Wireless  Security:  Critical  Issues  and 
Solutions‖ 29 January 2003 
[9]  Sandra  Kay  Miller  ―Facing  the  Challenge  of  Wireless 
Security‖ July 2001 
[10]  T.  Karygiannis  and  L.  Owens.  Wireless  Network 
Security:802.11,  Bluetooth  and  Handheld  Devices.  In 
NIST Special Publication 800-48, November 2002. 
[11]  Paulo  Salvador,  Ant´onio  Nogueira,  Rui  Valadas 
―Predicting  QoS  Characteristics  on  Wireless  Networks‖ 
25 June 2007.  
[12]  Jim  Kurose  ―Open  issues  and  challenges  in  providing 
quality  of  service  in  high-speed  networks‖  Computer 
Communication Review, 23(1):6-15, January 1993. 

AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
 
 Raj Kumar Singh was born at Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, India on 24th 
October,  1989.  Currently,  He  is  pursuing  his  M.Tech  degree  in 
Instrumentation  and  Control  Engineering 
from  NIT  Jalandhar.  He  did  his  B.Tech  in 
Electronics  and  Communication  Engineering 
from  M.J.P.  Rohilkhand  University  Bareilly 
Uttar Pradesh India in 2009. He has published 
several  papers  in  national  conferences  and 
international journals on wireless and robotics. 
research 
His  area  of 
interest 
includes 
modelling 
and 
simulation  of  wireless 
networks,  robotics,  brain  computer  interfacing  and  biomedical 
applications. 
 
A.K.Jain  received  his  B.E  and  M.E  both  from  IIT,  Roorkee, 
(erstwhile  University  of  Roorkee,  Roorkee)  India  in  1981  and  1987 
respectively  and  received  his  Ph.D.  degree  on 
Quality  of  Service  in  High  Speed  Networks 
from  the  Dr.  B.  R.  Ambedkar  National 
Institute  of  Technology,  Jalandhar,  India  in 
2009.He  has  published  over 
twenty-five 
research  papers  in  national  and  international 
journals/conferences.  He  is  presently  working 
as  Professor  and  Head  in  the  Department  of 
Instrumentation  and  Control  Engineering,  Dr.  B.  R.  Ambedkar 
National  Institute  of  Technology,  Jalandhar,  India.  He  is  guiding 
Ph.D  and M.Tech  students  in  the  area  of Wireless Networks.  Before 
joining  N.I.T,  Jalandhar,  he  has  served  at  TIET  Patiala,  IET 
Lucknow,  and  NIT  Hamirpur  (Erstwhile  REC  Hamirpur)  in  various 
capacities.  His  research  interests  include  quality  of  service  in 
wireless  networks,  medium  access  protocols  for  mobile  computing, 
and mesh networks. Dr. Jain is life member of ISTE India. 
 

© 2012, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                                     Page | 118 
 

Volume 2, Issue 4, April 2012                                                                                                                               www.ijarcsse.com 

 

© 2012, IJARCSSE All Rights Reserved                                                                                                                     Page | 119 
 

